GC Native
=========
The question at hand is how GC interacts with native objects.

Today we can register native objects with GC that get freed with an arbitrary
OnFree function. We use this for files and sockets. We use OnFree to close the
files and sockets when the object is no longer reachable.

You can imagine any number of kinds of resources you might want to close when
an object becomes unreachable.

The problem is: I was relying on GC to close my socket connection to elinks.
GC doesn't give any guarantees about when it reclaims memory though. You can't
rely on it like this for clearly user visible functionality.

My proposal:
* Disallow OnFree from having any side effects other than freeing memory.

Which basically means we should no longer support OnFree. Things need to be
explicitly closed by the fble code. If you forget to... oops. That's bad.
Tough luck for you.

I just really hope there isn't a use case where we want to have some side
effect after the last reference to something is removed. That will be
difficult to deal with.

---

Places where I use GC's OnFree, and how to address them:
* For closing sockets.
* For closing files, but not stderr.

These are needed for:
* Flushing the buffer associated with the file if any.
  - But I already explicitly flush after every write, so not an issue?
* Freeing up resources in the OS associated with the file.

We can't just ignore them, though I probably wouldn't observe any major issues
if I did. What's the alternative? Explicit close by the user. That's the only
reasonable alternative, right?

For files, currently I return them as streams. I would need to change the
underlying API for sure, and probably the higher level API as well.

For example, instead of returning a stream, return a pair of stream and close
function. Or, if it's more convenient now, return an opaque handle to the
object, which you can pass to Read, Write, Close methods.

---

I'm still not convinced GC shouldn't be involved in freeing things.

Thinking about input and output streams. When reading from an input stream,
there is a real difference between 'the stream is closed, nothing more to
read' and 'block waiting for the next input'. That suggests pretty clearly
that, when writing to an output stream, we need a way to explicitly say "the
stream is closed, nothing more to read".

That's clear with the socket case in question. We need to explicitly tell
elinks the stream is closed, otherwise it thinks it's blocking waiting for the
next input.

The other direction isn't as obvious to me. Does the writer of a stream care
about whether the stream is open or closed? With pipes we get SIGPIPE in that
case. But you could also imagine allowing the writer to keep writing without
concern for who is reading.

I suppose the question is: should there be an explicit communication channel
from the reader of a stream back to the writer to say the stream is closed?
All the other information is going from writer to reader, not the other way
around.

Imagine a world where the writer literally cannot tell if there is a reader or
not. Then, from an information flow point of view, there is no reason the
reader should ever have to explicitly close an input stream. Unlike the other
direction, this conveys no information to anyone.

But input streams take up real resources in practice. Maybe a file descriptor
entry in the kernel somewhere. If we don't explicitly close input streams,
eventually we'll run out of those resources. That sounds exactly like what the
garbage collection ought to be doing for us.

Options:
* Rely entirely on the fble program to close the stream in any direction.
  I suggest we expose a C99 like interface based on Int@ for file descriptors,
  with read, write, open, close functions. We can layer better abstractions on
  top of that.
* If a user forgets to close a stream...
  - Might be nice if GC closes it for us?
  - Or maybe we should check to close the stream when the next call to open is
    done?
  - Or maybe it would be nice to have an assert run when GC collects the
    object, to crash the program and force the user to see the error?
  - Or just leak and not our problem.

If we go the Int@ route for file descriptors, there is no way to know who
might try to reference the file eventually. Anyone can pull a reference to it
out of thin air. That sounds like a bad API to me.

Maybe the trick is to think of very different use cases where the question of
GC on free would come into play. Maybe that will help to shed light on things.

---

GC layer options:
A. NativeObject is pure memory. No OnFree allowed.
 I would like to get here if possible. Maybe start here even if too
 restrictive.
B. As today: OnFree can have arbitrary side effects.
 I would like to move away from this.
C. OnFree sets some value somewhere that can be read later.
 Possible compromise option if (A) is too strict.

File API options:
A. Current approach: return functions to operate on file.
  No explicit handle to the open file.
B. Return explicit abstract handle to file.
  Which can be used with read, write, close.
C. Return int fd.
  And rely on higher layer to provide appropriate abstraction on top.

(C) is worse than (B) in the sense that you can create an int out of thin air.
At least (B) can track who all can still reference the object. (B) works
better than (C) for windows sockets too.

Where (A) is good depends on the higher level abstraction. One question with
(A) vs (B) is if we have an IO stream, can we close the input stream
separately from the output stream? How would the API for that look?

Higher level stream API options:
* Clearly input streams need an explicit end of file. A way to know we are
  done as opposed to waiting for ever.
* That suggests clearly output streams need an explicit way to send end of
  file. That could be via explicit close, or explicit end of stream marker.

Now here's where things get interesting.

Imagine we have an explicit close. I claim we still need to rely on GC with
side effects. Because after you close, you still have a handle to the (closed)
file object. We can't get rid of that handle until after all references are
gone, because we need at the very least to mark that the file is closed and we
should return that appropriately if anyone asks.

So we still need GC to have OnFree. That is different from close. Close closes
the stream. OnFree reclaims the handle for different future use.

Now imagine a pure implementation of this API. We have the same problem, but
no native code. For example, maybe opening a file adds an entry to a map.
Closing the file marks that entry as closed, but can't remove it from the map
yet, because there are still outstanding references. How can we remove it from
the map? We need to know when there are no longer outstanding references. That
suggests we need a way for GC to invoke fble code OnFree, not just native
code.

That sounds very scary and suspicious. Maybe we need processes built into the
language or a complete rethinking at a step back to cleanly address this
issue.

---

It's been a while since I last thought about this. Let me write down my
thoughts and see how it compares with what I wrote down before:

* The input stream interface has a notion of observable end of stream.
* That means the output stream interface needs a notion of explicit end of
  stream.
* So we'll need an API change, for sure.
* If you don't explicitly end the output stream, it must remain unended.
* Regardless of whether you are still holding a reference to the output stream
  or not, if you don't explicitly end the output stream, it must remain
  unended.

Consider the case of input stream. Two things can happen:
1. We read end of input before we GC the stream: Then we should close the
underlying FILE* on reading end of input and put NULL in its place in the GC
object. Subsequent attempts to read should see NULL and return Nothing.
2. We GC the object before reaching end of file.
Assuming closing an input stream is not observable, it doesn't matter if we
explicitly close it. Or we could detect if it's been closed and throw an error
saying the programmer messed up, because they forgot to close the stream. Or
we treat it as the user saying they want to keep the stream open forever and
do nothing.

Consider the case of output stream. Two things can happen:
1. We close the stream before we GC the stream: Then close the underlying
FILE* and replace with NULL.
2. We GC the object before explicitly closing. I claim we must not close the
stream, because it wasn't explicitly closed.

So at least for the input/output stream example, seems to me like it makes
sense to require explicitly closing the stream from a programmatic point of
view.

Is there some other use case or example where it's much less obvious? Where we
might have a bunch of shared users of a resource and we want to wait until the
last user is done with it before closing?

Let's review what I wrote before and see if I have reason not to remove
on_free from GC.

Two interesting things from earlier discussion:
1. The question of whether there needs to be explicit close of an input stream
by the reader.
2. How we might implement the FILE api with explicit close in pure code.

Let me review what I'm proposing:
1. Input streams read until the end. No explicit close required. If you don't
read until the end, the stream stays open??? But what if you are reading a
file, you don't want to read to the end, but you don't want to leak resources?

2. Output streams have an explicit close.

For GC implementation, close the underlying FILE* on end of stream, replace
the stored data with NULL. Easy.

For a pure implementation, where the file handle is represented by an int or
string or some such that points into a map, we can't re-use the handle?

We would have to have a sequence number with the handle. Also known as: we
can't re-use the handle. But it's a pretty big space of handles we can use, so
don't worry about it, right?

Anyway, all of which is to say, I have fear there is a reason we need OnFree
for native objects, but I don't have a clear compelling reason right now. So
let's get rid of OnFree and wait until we have a compelling need for it again,
then revisit the discussion then. Easy.

If I run into problems removing OnFree, then that should give me my compelling
need and we can revisit the discussion.

Summary of current uses of OnFree:
* The interpreter uses a native value to store the code for an interpreted
  function. We want to free the code when there are no more references to the
  function.
* app uses a native value for the App*. No OnFree used.
* sockets use a native value for the socket. OnFree is used to close the
  socket. Note that the socket is shared by input and output stream.
* sockets has a couple other similar use cases for sockets with OnFree, like
  for accept and for client sockets.
* stdio uses a native value for FILE*.
 
Two challenges here:
1. The interpreter! How will I handle the interpreter use case?
2. sockets: you can't close just the istream or the ostream, you have to close
both at once. Weird. What if you want to close the output stream so the other
end knows you have nothing more to say, but you want to read more from them?

Let's focus on the interpreter to start, because that sounds like the much
more challenging and interesting case.

Well, seems like the answer is obvious now:
* Yes, we want GC to support OnFree, for use cases like the interpreter.
* GC OnFree should not be used to close a FILE. That is not an appropriate use
  of OnFree.
* The output stream interface needs a way to explicitly close.
* When you close a socket, it's via the output stream interfaces explicit
  close, that implicitly closes the associated input stream as well.

Clear? Sounds clear to me.

Plan of action:
1. Define new API for files and sockets with explicit close of output streams.
2. Switch to new API for files and sockets.
3. Remove use of 'close' in OnFree for files and sockets.

No changes to the GC implementation or APIs are required.

---

Another question though: do we need explicit close of input streams? For
example, maybe we read partially through a bunch of input streams in a row. We
can't rely on reading end of file to close the stream, because we haven't read
that far.

That suggests we want a way to explicitly close input streams. Then input
streams have three related conditions to consider:
* Have we read to end of file.
* Have we explicitly closed it.
* Have we dropped the last reference to it.

It's hard. Think about implementing a pure implementation of streams. I keep
feeling like we want to have GC run some fble code when we drop the last
reference. Like a weak reference or some such.

Anyway, I'm not going to worry about this for now. Save it for when we do a
round of standard library clean up. I think it's still a hard problem without
an obvious solution.

