Fble 0.5 Release
================
Proposed focus area: performance.

Goal: Make fble pprof viewer fast enough to be useful in practice.

Possible features:
* Re-implement profiling in fble to generate samples.
* Optimize fble pprof viewer.
* Optimize function calls in runtime.

---

Bug: If we allocate a literal with 25746910 characters, it looks like we smash
the stack. That corresponds to 196MB allocation on the stack for the args.

Ugh. Any easy way around that? Do I need to make this a dynamic allocation?

We already end up using a vector for this. Why not use the vector from the
start? Regardless, I should probably write a test for this. But what limit is
reasonable? Sigh.

Let's write a test case, see if I can fix it. If no easy fix, leave it as a
todo for now and work around in the short term.

It's a bit tedious that we need a 1.2MB fble file to reproduce the error. Is
that really reasonable? Should we be supporting such large literals? What's
the alternative for my benchmark?

Anyway, see if we can get it to work. Then decide if I want to check it in.

I can get rid of the stack smashing issue. I need to figure out the aarch64
mov instruction to load a larger number into a register. What does GCC do?

  mov x0, 62977
  movk  x0, 0x11, lsl 16

Sigh. Looks like I'll have to fix that everywhere.

Let's read up on the details of mov and movk:
* mov takes a 16 bit number.
* movk moves a 16 bit shifted number in a register, keeping whatever else was
  already there.

---

I declare the performance improvement goal of this release met. What do I want
to shift my focus to next? I think to pprof. Figure out what UI I want. I can
prototype it in python. Then try implementing in fble. We can see how
performance is there.

When I have something I'm happy with, revisit the profiling implementation in
fble runtime itself. See if I can simplify and generalize it at the same time.
Though honestly it's hard to believe I can make it go faster by recording a
lot more detail in the profile...

I would like to make a decision on GC native values. That's a separate kind of
track to follow. Of course we'll want to do release cleanup/burndown when I
feel like I've finished with the meat of things. I do feel like I've finished
with the meat of the runtime changes, but plenty of other areas still worth
exploring.

---

Profiling work is feature complete. I'm happy with it. We now generate
google/pprof format (uncompressed) and can view it nicely in the fble-pprof
viewer. Performance of fble-pprof could certainly be improved, but it is
definitely useable.

We have a decision on gc native values: keep general OnFree support, but don't
use it for streams.

The fble-pprof viewer covers my fble application work for the release.

That means we can start the release burndown.

---

* Add an fble-pprof benchmark to fble-benchmark?

The hardest part to deal with is embedding so much data as the input file for
use in pure fble code.

The md5.prof file I have that takes about 2 minutes to parse is 3.1M large.
And we take up like half the memory on my raspberri pi. It's 8M in hex. gzip
compressed and then put in hex it goes to 630K.

It's too much data to be easily used in a benchmark, and I suspect stdio IO
monad contributes a fair amount to the performance cost. Pulling it into pure
computation seems unfair in that case?

All the other benchmarks have relatively small inputs and run a while.

I don't see a feasible way to implement a pure fble-pprof benchmark. The
quantity of input data needed to get decently long runtimes is too high.

As it stands, I can't easily look at a --profile for fble-pprof, because
there's no clean way to exit the server. Maybe I could compromise: add a
--benchmark option to the server that runs a few fixed queries and then exits?
It would be a shame not to have that as part of fble-bench though.

---

* Remove duplicate code for String StartsWith and List StartsWith?

Don't bother. The costs/benefits of sharing or duplicating the code are small.
We have test cases for them both, we can leave it however we want. I don't see
sufficient motivation to spend the effort to change it one way or the other.

---

* Remove unnecessary FbleProfile apis now that blocks and enabled fields are
  public again.

A function API has more value than direct access to FbleProfile, because it
is less likely to have to change in the future. Any FbleProfile API I have
today that makes sense I should keep, even if it isn't necessary.

Specifically:
* FbleEnableProfiling, FbleDisableProfiling - keep
* FbleProfileBlockName - 
  I'm inclined to drop, because the lifetime of the return result is unclear.
  Also, turns out there is only a single use in a test case, so it's easy to
  drop.
* FbleLookupProfileBlockId - drop
  It doesn't make sense to look up by char*, we need to lookup by name, right?
  Although, I'm not sure we could distinguish by name in the output profile.

Let's see how much work it will be to drop the last two APIs.

---

* Remove enabled argument to FbleNewProfile?

Cases for enable/disable:
* test.c, stdio.fble.c, app.c - disables by default, enabled implicitly via FbleMain.
* fble-perf-profile.c - enabled by default.
* profile tests - mostly enabled by default.

There is a single use of FbleEnableProfiling. It could easily be inlined.
There are no uses of FbleDisableProfiling.

We have disable by default, enable implicitly. Could we switch to enable by
default, disable implicitly? Yes. I think we could. Then no need to pass an
argument to new profile.

I think that makes the most sense. No need for enable/disable APIs, and always
enable by default.

The one tricky bit is test/profiles-test, which uses FbleMain, but doesn't
currently explicitly enable profiling.

---

* Change FbleOutputProfile function to take a file name instead of FILE*?

FILE* can do more than filename. In particular, it can do stdout.

Reasons to suggest we use a filename:
* The output needs to be binary
* It doesn't make sense to interleave with other stuff.

Reasons to use FILE*:
* You can output to stdout.

Reasons you might want to use stdout:
* For use with redirection, e.g. fble-perf-profile.

Alternatives to stdout for fble-perf-profile:
* --output, -o flag

Surely 'fble-perf-profile -o foo.prof' isn't that much worse than 
'fble-perf-profile > foo.prof'? Worst case you could manually do
'fble-perf-profile -o /dev/stdout'?

When it comes time to support gzip compression and we want to use zlib, maybe
it's better to have the file name format?

I don't see good enough motivation to change this right now. Let's hold off
until we have better motivation. It will be easy enough to change then.

---

* Avoid emitting 'call' counts in pprof for fble-perf-profile?

Not worth doing.

Pros:
* Save a small amount of space in generated profile. Probably less than 10 or
  20%.
* Avoid potential confusion looking at call counts in fble-perf-profile.
* Avoid need to document potential confusion looking at call counts in
  fble-perf-profile.

Cons:
* Small added complexity in implementation.
* Added complexity in API for generating a profile.
* Added complexity in test coverage to cover cases with and without.

The cons outweigh the pros in my mind.

---

* Figure out a nicer way to switch between -O0 and -O3 as needed for debug.

I should set up rules in the build system to provide .dbg variants of binaries
I want to debug. Don't build those by default, but make it so they can be
built on demand. I bet it's not too complicated to set up.

But also, let's hold off until next time I have a concrete use case. We can
add support for this in a lazy fashion.

If we don't build as part of 'ninja check', it's likely to bit rot. That's
okay with me. Better to figure out how to fix it when it rots than deal with
the tedium of modifying -O switch back and forth for debug.

---

* Add explicit close to OStream API.

I think it will be easiest to change OStream to output a stream of
Maybe@<Int@> rather than be a struct with a pair of putting Int@ and closing.
Maybe there are minor performance implications, but let's not worry about that
for now. We can change later if need be.

This type change is pretty tedious. What if I instead define an Int@ value for
EOF and use that? And maybe we should update the input stream to match too?

How about I hack up a thing where if you send -1, it closes the socket, and
see if it fixes elinks on fble-pprof?

Yeah, that fixes the elinks issue. I should think about this some more, then
do a proper job of it.

---

I'm thinking in circles on the OStream issue. I don't know the 'perfect' way
to do it. For now, let's just do something that lets us explicitly close an
output stream and stop using GC for that.

Easiest thing: Passing -1 to existing output stream closes. No need to change
types everywhere that way.

Here's a new issue that maybe I want to not worry about now: how can we close
an input stream? For example, maybe we want to open a bunch of files in a loop
and read the first 10 bytes. How do we avoid leaking file descriptors? The API
has no way to close the file descriptors. Should we rely on GC here? Sigh.

---

* Split FbleDataType into FbleStructType and FbleUnionType?
  Get rid of FbleDataTypeTag?

There is a lot of identical code between them though. I don't want to have to
duplicate that all. Maybe we do part way, encode the data type tag in the tag
for the type, but share the common structure.

I don't see the benefit of splitting the types here. The code for them is
identical except for printing as '+' versus '*'.

---

* Improve performance of fble-pprof?
  Currently dominated by the time to generate seq block and seq name lists for
  the full sequences.

I say don't bother. I could encode sequences as views on full sequences. That
wouldn't help seq name lists, and would be pretty involved. Performance is
plenty good enough when I use --profile-sample-period. Save this for another
time if/as performance of fble-pprof starts to bother me more.

---

* Pull undef check into separate instruction?
  So we can remove the check entirely if the compiler knows about it?
  Downside is the need for an extra GetFrameVar call on the value?

We've done enough performance optimizations for this release. This is low down
on the list. It won't buy us anything if we have to call GetFrameVar twice.
Another option would be to put extra info in each instruction about whether it
can assume something is strict or not.

Let me punt this into a slightly more general performance improvement to
consider down the line.

---

* Add fble to rosettacode.org?
  Or at least implement all the tasks, perhaps in a separate RosettaCode
  package to start.
  Probably start with all the 'Simple' tasks.

The tasks pretty heavily depend on the standard library. I think it would be
good to sketch them out, but I'd rather wait until after revamping the
standard library.

---

* Add spec test to catch case of tbnz not having enough limit for undef check.

For the three undef checks, we used to have:
  fprintf(fout, "  tbnz x0, #1, .Lo.%04zx.%zi.u\n", func_id, pc);

Now we have:
  fprintf(fout, "  tst x0, #2\n");
  fprintf(fout, "  b.ne .Lo.%04zx.%zi.u\n", func_id, pc);

Let me temporarily revert that, recreate the bug, write a spec test to catch
it (presumably a really long literal?), then revert back the fix.

I have a super long literal test already. Does that not catch it? Apparently
not.

It's because the super long literal stores data in the data section, not the
text section. I need to somehow generate super big code. Like, lots of
instructions. Maybe lots of nested case expressions? Or function calls?

Let me try a bunch of case expressions.

---

* Get rid of FbleFunction?

FbleFunction is an executable with profile block and pointer to static
arguments.

FbleFuncValue is an FbleFunction with value header and space allocated for the
actual static values.

Where we use FbleFunction:
* In prototype for FbleRunFunction, the function to run.

That's pretty much it. It's the FbleRunFunction interface.

FbleFuncValue has an FbleFunction which we can always get from it.

The alternative would be to use FbleFuncValue everywhere instead of
FbleFunction. Honestly... I kind of like FbleFunction interface. It's just a
bit of separation.

Let's keep it separate for now. If it turns out to be a big performance
opportunity later on, we can revisit.

---

* Add test that would catch the bug if we failed to GcRealloc a value before
  ref assignment.
  - ref assign to a value which is stack alloc -> gc alloc -> ref.

First let's try reintroducing the bug, see what happens. This goes into
FbleDefineRecursiveValues.

Seems like the case is covered by
SpecTests/8.4-ModularCompilation/Basic/Builtin.fble, but only because I have
an assert for that case in the code. Otherwise all the spec tests pass. Let's
see if all the other tests pass too.

fbld/SpecTests/stack-smash.fbld.fble.tr fails with an invariant violation in
GC. That's the only test I have that fails. fble-benchmark fails pretty
quickly too.

So yeah, that's the error I want to catch in the spec tests somehow. Sounds
hard. Let me think about it.

---

* Add test for vacuous value in 1 of multiple ref value assignments.
 - If we don't already have such a thing.

We don't already have a such a thing. We have VacuousValue and
IndirectVacuousValue tests. But why do I want to test this specific thing?
What makes me concerned about this situation?

Oh. I misread. This is easy, yeah. I should definitely test this. This is to
make sure we return and report the error for the correct value of the bunch.

---

* Remove now unused FBLE_PROFILE_ENTER_OP, EXIT_OP, and REPLACE_OPs?

I should remove them eventually, because they aren't tested. But I think there
is a decent chance I'll want to reuse the code for code coverage early in the
next release, so let me keep it around one more release before removing.

---

Draft release notes. Things included in this release:
* fble-pprof
* revamp profiling
* revamp abstract types
* performance improvements

---

 - Spec test for main .fble file not found somehow? load.c

This currently falls outside of what spec tests can support. For spec tests
you give the .fble file as input, it derives the main module from that. The
only way I could support this is with a change to spec test infrastructure.

How might that look?

Either I need to totally revise how we discover tests, or we need to add a
special case just for testing this thing. I don't think it's worth it in
either case. There are a class of tests that fall outside of spec testing.

Is it worth adding this as a test elsewhere? Is it likely to break? Either
way, if it's outside of spec tests, I won't get code coverage.

Do we want to add some way for non-spec test code coverage tests? No. I don't
think so. I don't see the value just yet. It would be a pretty big change not
worth doing so late in the release.

Let me drop this todo item. If test coverage becomes a problem later on down
the line, we'll learn about it and can take action to deal with it then.

---

 - Spec test for builtin module with builtin dependencies? load.c

Normally I would say builtin modules are outside of the spec. Not suitable for
spec test coverage. But looks like I already have /SpecTests/Builtin%. The
spec says nothing about builtin modules though, does it? Nothing about how
they should behave.

The spec talks about: Foo.fble.@ files, what is the source of truth. It
doesn't say anything about Foo.fble.@ dependencies on other modules.

Can we think of a reasonable case where a builtin module depends on other
modules? Is the desired behavior clear in that case?

If I can't think of a reasonable case, or behavior isn't clear, then I suggest
putting an assert in the loading code saying TODO, and deal with that case
if/when it arises.

Builtin modules are primarily for things that need access to native functions.
They are a bit sketch to start with in that sense. I currently use them for:
stdio IO, networking, and debug print. When would you imagine builtins
depending on other builtin modules? Or, maybe the question: when would you
imagine builtins depending on other modules at all, builtin or not?

Hmm... are builtins indistinguishable from compiled modules from the point of
view of the loader?

Current behavior of the loader:
* If you ask to load a 'builtins' module, it loads that and all its internal
  dependencies. Done.
* Otherwise look for .fble file and .fble.@ files, look for dependencies
  recursively.
  - Where we try loading from builtins.

Perhaps the most practical use case is if you want to fble-compile .fble code
into a custom binary, where you treat the compiled code as builtin. Then use
that to load somebody else's possibly interpreted code. As soon as you
reference a builtin module, it pulls in all the other modules it depends on.

Then my concern is real. Say we have a /User% module that references builtin
modules /Builtin/A% and /Builtin/B%, and that /Builtin/A% references
/Builtin/B%. Loading A% loads B% without type info. Loading /User% loads B%,
but sees it was already loaded, but we never got the type info for B%.

And what if type type info for B% doesn't match the builtin? That's a problem
in general.

Anything in my notes from before about all this? Yes. From what I can see by
skimming it says "this sounds hard".

I should revisit this wholistically at some point. Maybe now. Maybe later.
Another part of the discussion sitting on my todo list is adding an option for
loading modules from .so files.

If it's just thoughts, let's have those thoughts now. Moving to
thoughts/fble-0.5/modular_compilation.txt.

---

* Is it a problem that we use O(n) lookups in link.c?

The real point here is I should probably update FbleModuleMap to use a hash
table instead of an array. But if it's not a problem now, let's not worry
about it now. Some time in the future I can see what the real bottlenecks are
for large scale programs, and this will show up if it's really a problem.

---

* Use a special ref value instead of NULL to represent undefined values?

I know it's messy. I tried before. There is some boundary we want NULL values
at. The purported purpose of this is to improve performance. But I already
improved performance enough this release. This certainly won't make the code
any cleaner. I'm not convinced it will make much difference performance wise.
Skip it. Come back later if so motivated.

---

* Fbld Language

This is a big task. This is a feature all its own. The fbld language isn't
causing me trouble at the moment.

I'll need to figure out some way to fit these large tasks into my workflow.
But not now. Focus effort where it has the most value. Right now, that's not
fbld.

Same goes for custom fble debugger.

---

* Consider removing higher order kinds from the language.

This is worth thinking about now. Let's make a decision this release to change
the language or abandon this. If I decide to change the language, figure out
how, but leave the changes for the next release.

See thoughts/fble-0.5/kinds.txt for discussion and resolution.

---

Tutorials: ...

C API isn't stable yet, and also I don't think it should be the focus of my
priorities in terms of documentation. I think this is left over from when the
tutorials were about the C API and I switched to pure fble language focus. I
vote drop this.

/App/App%, /Core/Test%... wait until I revamp the standard library.
Documentation will be a core part of that revamp. So no need to tutorialize
it now.

Exercises for each main point in every tutorial... it's hard to give myself
feedback on doing the tutorials. There will always be opportunity to improve
them. But I think better to wait a while to avoid getting too deep into the
tutorial, and give myself a chance to step back and rethink how to teach the
language.

In other words, I don't want to deal with this now. Let me worry about it
later, where later, I assume, will naturally arise without the need to keep
reminding myself release after release.

---

* Figure out why building with ninja from the source directory ends up
  building all the tests. And fix that somehow.

It ought not to be difficult to understand. We build in place, that adds new
directories, I glob directories as a build dependency. No?

Let me verify the details. Regardless, why not always build in an out/
subdirectory at the top level? That way people don't have to go out of their
way to know to do that. You could run configure top level always. How
convenient would that be for me? No need to keep changing to the out directory
for ninja to run okay?

I feel like the build specification should be:
* You can build from whatever directory you like.
* It puts build.ninja and configure file in your build directory.
* It puts generated outputs in the out/ subdirectory of your build directory.

See thoughts/fble-0.5/build.txt.

---

* fble-pprof doesn't work on windows because read isn't binary by default.
  Add an option to open? Coerce everything to binary, including stdio?

Here's my proposal: have 'Read' and 'Write' stdio functions read and write in
binary mode. Leave stdio and stdin as their default text mode.

That fixes the fble-pprof test error, and I feel like mostly works as you
want. I can think of contrived problems with it, but I don't really care too
much about things working great on windows right now, as long as the tests
pass.

---

* Figure out how to add an fble-pprof benchmark to fble-benchmark?
  Either via support for pure embedded files, or IO in the benchmarks.

Here's the deal. IO in benchmarks is not enough for me, because I don't want
to have to depend on an external file for the input to the benchmark. That
means what I want is to have the bytes as part of the executable file and read
them from there.

If we had a reasonable way to do that, then we could generate an fble function
that takes the byte number as argument and returns the result. You could then
turn that into pure execution.

I don't think it's worth the trouble right now.

The alternative would be to generate a profile on the fly, as part of the
benchmark. That might be cool. But I don't want to go to the effort of
implementing code to generate proper pprof format in fble right now.

So, in summary, the answer is no. Don't figure this out in this release.

Out of curiosity though, could I implement this in C using a big, constant
array of bytes? What's the limit on file size? Where would the data end up?
Maybe I'll play around a little.

If I generate a C file with a const char data[] = { ... }, I see it showing up
in the .rodata section of my executable. That could work, maybe? The generated
C will be rather larger than I would like, but maybe that's a portable way to
get the data into an executable?

Anyway, something to think about another time.

---

Okay! Last thing before the release. That annoying GcRealloc bug that we don't
have spec test coverage for.

To test it, the scenario I want is something like:

List@ X = List@(cons: @(head: a, tail: Append(long_list, X)));

The key points being:
* The value for X is stack allocated, because it's a union_value expression.
* The value for X refers to a GC allocated value: the tail, which consists of
  a long list, which ought to have turned into a GC allocated value by now.
* The GC value refers to the recursive value X, because we appended X to the
  end.

Then we have to GC allocate the resulting reference value, which leaves a
dangling pointer in the tail to the final 'X'. Then we have to smash the
stack, and finally reference that final 'X' and see it isn't what we expect.

Maybe it's doable. Let me play around.

Hey! I got it. Cool.

---

Let's update the release notes, then start putting out some release
candidates.

Things to add to the release notes:
* Binary mode for stdio Read and Write?
* Allow higher poly kinds where less high poly kinds expected?

Those are the only two potentially worthwhile entries to add.

---

Trouble with line endings on windows.

What's happening, I suspect, is that when github checks out fble, it does so
in windows using native line endings, so, e.g., fbld/SpecTests.fbld is checked
out with \r\n line endings instead of \n line endings. Now fble-fbld reads it
as a binary file, we see the \r\n line endings, but the fbld parser only
checks for \n line endings and we fail to parse.

What's the right solution here? There are lots of hacks we could use.

Add support for parsing \r\n directly in fbld?
* Sounds like the wrong approach. We should be allowed to rely on \n only
  coming in from the file we read. That's how everyone else does it.

Provide a way to open the file in text mode?
* That's what the rest of the world does. I don't like that we need to
  identify and treat text files differently from binary files.

Configure git to always check out files with \n?
* But some people probably want to have them checked out with \r\n if working
  on things on windows, and it seems unfair not to allow them to.

All of which means, apparently, I need to bow down, take the hit, and require
users to specify text versus binary when opening a file to read or write.
  
  (String@) { M@<Maybe@<IStream@<M@>>>; } read,
  (String@) { M@<Maybe@<OStream@<M@>>>; } write,

Become:

  (String@, Mode@) { M@<Maybe@<IStream@<M@>>>; } read,
  (String@, Mode@) { M@<Maybe@<OStream@<M@>>>; } write,

Ugh. Annoying, but it should solve all my problems. Let's try it.

