MVP2
====
From MVP1 we have basic gates and running of the model.

MVP2 is about getting the gate editor UI into good enough state to be useful.

Proposal: Develop the editor sufficiently enough to be useful for implementing
a 4-bit adder, or a 4-bit counter.

Brainstorm of things to include:
* Fix graphics so you can tell what gate something is by looking at it
 - Need to use color to distinguish between, e.g. 0 and 1 output of switch
   gate.
* Fix model to advance gates in addition to engines, so we don't have to worry
  about extra space requirements outside of 0 and 1 gates.
* Fundamental editing features
 - Place any gate of my choice anywhere, easily.
 - Remove gates. Modify existing gates: rotate, change type.
 - Place/remove/edit cars on the map.
 - Undo?
* Pause / resume execution of the model.
* Load and save models/cars to file.

Don't worry about modularization yet. One flat model that I can edit and
expand and save between sessions.

Let's say you pass the name of a model file at startup, you have some way to
explicitly 'save' to file. Or maybe it auto-saves when you close.

Question: Should we support highlighting a rectangular region and copying it
and pasting it somewhere else? How about yes if it turns out to be useful
(which it almost certainly will).

Sounds like a plan.

---

Step 1: Clean up how we do graphics.

Today I have sprites separate from colors. That can't work in a world where I
need to have an individual gate, like, switch, in multiplie different colors.
Let's move colors in with sprites.

Um... that suggests moving back to a single Graphics file? It's a different
way of thinking about how to display things. Before I was thinking we could
have text output, in which case you only get all or nothing for a color.

How might I layer things?
* Colors, by car, background, generic gate.
* Shapes - gate box, car box, direction, selection
* Gates: shapes + colors
* Model rendering: tying things all together.

Maybe do: Graphics/Colors, Graphics/Shapes, Graphics/Gates, Graphics.fble.

Okay? Let's try that.

---

How to sort out gate/engine motion?

The main goal: avoid the need for a double push through 0 and 1 gates. Some
gates should process themselves rather than need a car to instigate.

I feel like there are two parts to a gate:
1. Through path. If an engine tries to push through, what way does it go?
2. Activation. What the gate does on its own.

* noop - no through path ever. no activation.
* rail - through path as directed, no activation.
* sink - no through path ever. activation removes car on it (if any).
* source - through path as directed. activation adds an engine if empty.
* zero, one - through path as directed if passing. Activation adds car if waiting.
* switch - through path if enabled. No activation.
* select - no through path. Activation to sink cars?
* dup - through paths as directed.

Certainly I want zero/one gate to have an activation. It would be nice if
source had an activation. How about the sinks? Can we say engines only move
cars, they don't add or remove them? Activations only add or remove, they
don't move?

Can everything be described as conditional move, add, or remove?

Order matters for processing? I worry about the conflict between sink and
engine. Though I guess it doesn't matter: engine can't go through sink gate,
so that's that. But it would be bad if we listed engines, then sink an engine
on a switch gate, for example, then try to drive that engine? No. Doesn't seem
like it matters.

Anyway, if I were to have an order, what order would I have?
1. Do remove activations in order. No conflicts.
2. Do moves. Speculatively, sorted, to address potential conflicts.
3. Do adds. No conflicts.

We could potentially do (1) and (2) at the same time all in a single pass.
That makes sense to me, because it should be isolated.

Or, can we do a single traversal? No. Don't want to do a single traversal. We
don't want to mix up movements with gate activations? Hmm... It should be okay
if we ...

I have gates and I have cars. Traverse the cars to find the engines. Traverse
the gates to find activations / removals. Natural split. I just decide what
goes first: gates or cars.

The only difference should be latency of some operations. For example:

Move car on to 1 gate... I don't think it matters. It's easy to change. Let's
do gates first. Proposal is pretty easy then:
1. iterate though all the gates, run any that are active.
2. iterate through all the cars, collect all the engines, then try each engine
one at a time.

For (2), we want a generic result from a gate to say Maybe@<Dir@> to say what
direction, if any, you push through if you push on the gate. The nice thing is
determining the direction should be free of the recursive knot.

Sounds like I have plenty to go on. Just dive in and make the switch over all
at once.

---

It's not as clean as I'm hoping. Some gates change state when something is
pushed through. Let's not try to clean it out yet. Just separate out the
activation operations from the pass-through operations.

---

And apparently this doesn't fix the problem with tag gates? How do I want tag
gates to work?

It's a single gate, but with an output direction. There are two ways it could
work:
1. When you see a new train on the gate, add a tag car to the output as
activation. Forward only after you've added.
2. Any time you see a free space, add an output?

I rather add the tag to the gate location directly. Only use the destination
for the destination. Can we do that? Maybe I need to setbusy/idle to say:
while it is 'idle', nothing can move to it. But we don't currently have a way
to stop things moving to something. We only have a way to stop things moving
off of something.

This is a good question. It's similar to the question of what happens if you
have a rail pointing to nothing? Conceptually, the car shouldn't go off the
edge of the rail. Similarly, we shouldn't be allowed to go onto a tag gate if
it is preparing a tag value to go on top.

So let's try to make it work by putting the tag on the gate, and blocking
anyone from landing on the gate until we've had a chance to do so. And let's
make sure we don't allow cars to drive off of rails. Uh... how?

Right now, GoGate means go from gate. Let's say it's anything. Say it is a
rail. Then we first call 'GoAt' to see if we can move to the destination.
Right now, if there's no gate or if there's no car, we go ahead. That's what I
need to fix. The gates themselves need to choose if you can put a car there or
not. Okay? It's no longer a question of whether the gate can push something
out of the way. Though it may need to.

Maybe rename 'GoAt' to 'GoTo'? Like, we want to go to this location. See
what's there, which may be nothing. Ask if we are allowed to go there?

But wait. How can this be a problem? Why doesn't tag gate add a tag value at
the same time it forwards the caboose? Then there's no issue, right? That's
the problem. If I insert the caboose there, we have no way of doing that
successfully while stopping the advance of the car that's trying to go to that
place in the first place. Which means we have to fail? Well, but, you would be
the engine anyway. You would have to be. Move out the engine, place the
caboose, do it successfully, done?

It's tricky. I would like to sort out a reasonable way of thinking about gates
and how they advance.

---

Engine ==> Gate => GoTo => Gate Accept.

GoEngine - get the gate at that location, and GoGate it.
GoGate - We want to push the car at the current gate through it
* We have a car value.
* If there's something in the way that I need to push out, 'GoAt' there.
GoAt - Look up the gate. See if we are allowed to enter the gate.
* We may not have any car there.

Seems like maybe GoGate should take a Maybe@<Value@>? Nothing means there is
no car there. We just want to check that we can proceed into that gate.

Let's try that. Also, I want to ditch Noop gate.

---

Do we allow things to enter source gates? I certainly need things to be able
to leave them. But if there's something there, it must be an engine, and we
don't want to allow pushing through it. But that would have been detected...
when? At what point do we prevent pushing through of engines? That must be
GoAt.

How does GoAt work then?
1. Find the target gate. If none, don't allow it. Fail.
2. Find the car value there. If engine, don't allow it.
3. Call into GoGate with the value.

See how that works.

So then, do we allow things to be moved into Source?

I don't have an option to allow things to go out of a gate (via engine push)
but not into the gate. Let's not worry about that detail right now.

---

Why am I changing things again? Tag? Doesn't seem to matter. I need to look
more closely at the implementation of Tag. Figure out how this is supposed to
work.

---

Note: no need for struct gates. With my latest set of gates, we can do
everything without it.

Specifically, struct was taking two trains, putting them on one track, then
later separating the trains. We can easily do that by putting 0 or 1 header on
each train, route them to the same track, then switch them off based on header
on the other end. That's nice.

---

I'm redoing all of the gates. I have the new gate code in place, and updates
to the model. What's next before I can compile and run something useful?

Still needed:
* Updated drawing.
* Updated test cases.
* Updated sample model.

Shall I clear all the tests to start, clear the sample, start again from
scratch?

---

Okay! I have enough UI now that I should be able to make some more complex
models. What are the next steps?

* Add support for r2 rotation: rotating the 2nd direction of a gate.
* Add support for save/restore.
* Design and implement my 4-bit adder.

Uh... how do I design my 4-bit adder? I feel like I need pen and paper. I
don't know how to think about it otherwise. Well, let's think about it on pen
and paper and go from there.
