Revamp
======

The concept for computrainer is cool, it's just too hard to implement
anything. Here's an idea for how to revamp things.

Ditch trains.

Let's say you have a 2D grid of bits as the playing field.

To compute, you provide a set of rules.

A rule describes an atomic transition. Think bludspec style rule. The rule
fires when a set of bits exactly match a pattern. The result is to set a bunch
of bits to an exact pattern.

For example, and And gate could be implemented as 4 rules. Say it has 3
squares, a, b, c.

Rule: a, b ==> c

Rule 1: 0, 0 ==> 0
Rule 2: 0, 1 ==> 0
Rule 3: 1, 0 ==> 0
Rule 4: 1, 1 ==> 1

From a compute point of view, geography doesn't matter. In general we can say
a rule is a list of inputs that need to be 0, a list of inputs that need to be
1, a list of outputs that are set to 0 and and a list of outputs that are set
to 1. The rule fires randomly if the inputs match, with the result of setting
the outputs.

It's okay for the same square to be both an input and an output of a rule.

Composition of two rules is done by specifying which bits from one rule
correspond to which bits of another rule. For example, using the rules above.

 1.a = 2.a
 1.b = 2.b
 1.c = 2.c

You can have a module, which is a collection of rules or submodules.

I claim it's easy to specify a rule graphically: just drag 0s and 1s to the
grid where you want inputs and outputs. Maybe have two different colored 0s,
one for input, one for output, and two different colored 1s. Each tile has
space for an input and an output. Drag and drop.

Hopefully it's easy to specify a module graphically: drag and drop rules on
top of each other.

The physical location of a bit doesn't impact computation. You could drag
different bits around to 'optimize' the circuit. Draging a bit updates the bit
used for any module or rule that references that location.

We can say something like the cost of executing a rule is proportional to the
square of the largest distance between locations in a rule. That gives
motivation to compose small rules rather than define one big massive rule.

I claim it is much easier to describe circuits this way than with trains.
Everything feels much more direct. We still get a pretty display for execution
of computation. We can have levels corresponding to functional modules with
test cases. The user can build libraries of things up. The user can
instantiate a module and then reshape it however they want for its particular
use to optimize the network.

To get started, I think best to try implementing a decent sized circuit. Maybe
a 4 bit or 12 bit adder. Implement it in fble, run it. Don't worry about any
UI. Then add a display to show the execution. Only after that start to think
about how the editor might look.

What should I call this?

I should revamp hwdg for this. It's a generalization of that anyway.
