Fble Lifetimes
==============
There are a couple of questions:
1. What is the lifetime of an fble value? Is it clear from the spec? If not,
how should the spec be written to make it clear?

2. How can we efficiently track lifetimes at runtime?
This is suspected to be the current greatest opportunity for performance
improvement in the runtime.

For example, consider a function like:

(Bit2X@, Bit2X@, /Bits/Bit1%.Bit1@){Result@;} fulladd = (Bit2X@ a, Bit2X@ b, /Bits/Bit1%.Bit1@ cin) {
    B.Result@ rlo = B.fulladd(a.lo, b.lo, cin);
    B.Result@ rhi = B.fulladd(a.hi, b.hi, rlo.cout);
    Result@(Bit2X@(rhi.z, rlo.z), rhi.cout);
  };

Today, when we see 'a.lo', we increment the reference count on a.lo, then
decrement the reference count on a.lo. But because we know that 'a' is alive
for the duration of the function, there is no need to increment and decrement
the refcount on a.lo.

---

I have an idea I would like to explore.

The motivation is performance. Currently the most significant thing that shows
up in profiling is the cost of calling Retain on arguments when passed to a
function and of calling Release on each local value when we return from a
function.

We could try optimizing Retain/Release, and I could try using a smarter
allocator for stack memory, but I think the real issue is having to call some
form of constructor/destructor for each value individually.  Contrast this
with something like C, where all you need to do is update the stack pointer
when you leave a function.

The idea is, any object allocated while executing a function will either be
reachable from the function's return value or not. If the object is not
reachable from the function's return value, then it should be freed when the
function exits. If the object is reachable from the function's return value,
then it is the caller's job to free that object.

In this case, an object's lifetime is tied to a particular stack frame. That
is, all objects (under this simplified view), are freed when some particular
function exits. So what if we make sure when we allocate the object in the
first place, we allocate it in the stack frame for the function that will free
it?

In a simplified view, if we did this, we wouldn't need garbage collection at
all. We know when we allocate an object how long it will need to live. We free
it when we already know no references will outlast it. Feels sort of like
lifetimes tracked in RUST maybe?

Now, there are a lot of details to work out. Let's look at some of them.

Basic approach
--------------
When a function is called, it is supplied by the caller with
an allocator that it should use for any object that might be returned from the
function. We do some analysis at compile time to determine which local
variables in the function could possibly be returned from the function or not.
Any local variables that could be returned from the function should be
allocated using the allocator supplied by the caller. Any other local
variables should be allocated using the functions local allocator.

We can conceptually pass an allocator to the expression used to define a local
variable. If that expression is StructValue, UnionValue or some such, it just
allocates with the allocator. If the expression is a function, we pass the
allocator to that function to use.

When the function exits, we bulk free everything allocated with its local
allocator (no gc needed, no traversal, no destructors).

For example:

(Int@) { X@; } Foo = (Int@ x) {
  Int@ y = Int@(2: Unit);
  Bool@ p = f(x, y);
  p.?(true: X@(foo: Unit), X@(bar: Unit));
};

In this case, y is allocated locally. p is allocated locally by passing the
local allocator to f. But the X@ are allocated using the caller supplied
allocator. 

Returning Arguments
-------------------
Sometimes a function will return one of the arguments input to it as part of
the result. For example:

(IntP@) { Int@; } N = (IntP@ x) {
  Int@(n: x);
};

The return result in this case includes both the Int@ allocated locally and
the IntP@ passed as an argument. In this case we need to ensure that the
argument x will stay alive as long as the returned result. Consider a caller:

(...) { X@; } Foo = (...) {
  IntP@ i = ...;
  Int@ x = N(i);
  x;
};

For this case to work, we must ensure that i is allocated using the caller's
supplied allocator, because x may take a reference to i. A different function
N may never return the argument as part of its result, in which case i could
be allocated using the local function's allocator.

This demonstrates that the caller needs to do something differently depending
on the implementation of the function it is calling. So we probably want to
capture that information in the type of the function. I think we could do it
with a simple boolean flag for each argument to a function: could this
argument be returned as part of the function result or not.

Dynamic Behavior
----------------
Sometimes we may not know statically whether a value is returned from a
function or not. For example:

(...) { X@; } Foo = (...) {
  X@ x1 = ...;
  X@ x2 = ...;
  Bool@ p = ...;
  p.?(true: x1, false: x2);
};

We don't know which one of x1 or x2 we should allocate locally and which one
we should allocate to the caller. In this case, let's just allocate both to
the caller. Then whatever happens, we know we'll be okay.

Of course, this means the one that doesn't get returned to the caller is going
to live longer than you would think. Maybe that's okay?

Well, consider this malicious case:

(X@) { X@; } Foo = (X@ x1) {
  X@ x2 = ...;
  Bool@ p = ...;
  p.?(true: x1, false: x2);
};

A function that allocates x2, but in practice never returns it. If we were to
call it repeatedly somehow, every time we called it we would allocate a new x2
to the caller, and that would grow memory indefinitely. But any normal
reading of object lifetimes we would always collect the x2 shortly after
allocating, so we could repeatedly call Foo forever without running out of
memory. In other words, this does matter.

So, in that case, perhaps we give an option to a function to explicitly free
an allocated object (and every other object allocated for the purposes of that
allocated object). In this example, once we compute that we are returning x1,
at runtime we call explicitly free all the objects allocated for x2 out of the
caller supplied allocator.

It's too bad that we have to do an explicit free here, but I'm hoping this is
a rare case and we still get the benefit that we allocated the object to its
final resting place instead of allocating it locally and potentially having to
copy or move it elsewhere.

Things get a little confusing if we may or may not return the argument. It
seems in this case the caller may need to be involved in explicitly freeing
the argument from its caller if the callee doesn't end up using an argument in
the result that the caller thought might be returned to its caller.

Returning Static Variables
--------------------------
A static variable seems kind of like an argument. How do we return it? Who is
responsible for ensuring that it stays alive as long as its result? Can we
figure that out with analysis somehow? Like, if you call a function in order
to determine a result to some caller, then you must guarantee the function,
and thus any static variable it references, is also allocated to that caller
or some other lifetime that will outlast that caller. I think that's probably
doable.

Unknown Functions
-----------------
We have to know something about the function to make sure its arguments are
allocated the right place. What if we don't know exactly what the function is
at runtime, because it depends on the result of a dynamically computed value?
Well, we could either require from the user that they have the same type with
regards to returning arguments, or just be conservative and say any arg that
any function we could be calling that might be returnable we'll allocate to
the caller.

Tail Calls
----------
In the case of a tail call, I guess the callee inherits the allocator from the
caller? I suspect we'll need to handle this specially somehow. I'm not sure
how.

Puts and Gets
-------------
If you put a value on a port, how do you know where that value should be
allocated? And how does the caller know, if it's an argument? This sounds
like a rather complicated case. Maybe I shouldn't worry about it to start. We
could probably work around it given Puts and Gets aren't that fundamental a
language feature. Either by making copies or remove Put/Get or being
conservative, or something.

Partial Return
--------------
Let's say I call a function, get some struct back, then return only one field
of the struct. How long should the other fields live? I could come up with a
pathological case where the other fields should not live beyond the function
call. But how can we say: free all objects allocated for the other fields that
aren't allocated for this field? Doesn't that need some kind of GC or
traversal of objects?

Or what if a function uses just one field of an argument passed in. How does
the caller know to free the rest of the fields, and which rest of the fields
to free? This sounds pretty complicated.

---

I think the high level summary is we want to do some static analysis to track
which values flow where. The type of a function will need to encode whatever
info the static analysis needs to figure things out based on arguments and
results. Then we can figure out where we ought to allocate an object. And if
we allocated it to a place where we later discover it didn't need to live so
long, we explicitly free it, hopefully rarely, but probably okay even if not.

---

In C, the lifetimes of different kinds of objects are managed differently.

* Small, fixed sized values are allocated on the stack and passed by value to
  and from a function.
* Large, fixed sized values can be allocated on the stack and passed by
  pointer to a function, which can update the value in place.
* Variable sized arrays can be allocated on the stack. It's the programmers
  job to ensure no pointers into the array are returned from the function.
* Otherwise Large or dynamically sized values are allocated on the heap with
  small fixed size pointers passed around.
  - If there is a single owner, these are freed explicitly by their owner.
  - If there can be multiple owners, use reference counting.
  - If there can be cycles with multiple owners, use garbage collection.

In some sense, single owner is like multiple owners reference counting, except
we can elide reference increments and decrements if we know there is another
reference to it for the entire duration.

I feel like what constitutes small versus large depends on the machine you are
running on. It's a tradeoff in the cost of copying data versus copying a
pointer and managing the memory. Better, in theory, then to have the language
implementation decide what's small or large.

The fble implementation has access to whether values are fixed size or
variable size, and how big fixed size values are.

The question is, can an fble implementation reasonably pick between these
different strategies for managing objects based on what it knows about the
objects? Rather than the current conservative approach of allocating
everything on the heap, passing pointers around, and using gc to collect
things. And how much performance benefit could we get from that?

Brainstorm of information the programmer provides in C that an fble
implementation would not have access to:
* The implicit contract for functions with regards to whether they expect to
  be the last user of an argument, or whether they may return an argument as
  part of the result. Probably this ought to be part of the type of the
  function, because you can't properly use the function without knowing this
  information.
* When it's okay to hold on to some memory longer than it is otherwise needed.
  In the extreme case, for example, leaking a static singleton.
* Which operations are more performance sensitive. For example, maybe it's
  better to copy a large object if the only time we need to copy isn't
  performance sensitive, but the times we would need to retain/release are.

---

Here's a possible first step: let's add support for allocation and passing
around small, fixed sized values on the stack in fble. For example, a Bit32@
could be passed around as an actual 32 bit int instead of more than 64
separate FbleValue objects.

The expected benefits are:
* Less time spent allocating FbleValue objects, because there are hopefully
  much less that we need to allocate as FbleValue objects.
* Less time spent in gc, because we are allocating fewer FbleValue objects.
* Less time spent in retain/release because we don't have to retain/release
  the small fixed size objects.
* Small, fixed sized objects could potentially all be freed together in bulk,
  without having to visit each individual one.

I think this would qualify as a fundamental performance improvement, given
that we can change a linear time traversal of all objects we need to free into
a single bulk free. And the fact that we may end up doing 30x fewer object
allocations.

This is going to be a big change. We'll need type information now to be able
to construct and access values. For polymorphic functions, we probably need to
pass type information for abstract types (like, the size in number of bits) to
the function. We probably want to support accessing values at arbitrary bit
offsets into memory. A stack frame will be a mix of values and pointers that
we'll have to keep track of offsets for. We'll need to update the FbleCode*
instructions and architectural state.

I think it's worth a try. I think it's reasonable to limit scope to just this
for now, and save until later concerns about how to elide retain/release, or
use reference counting instead of gc to track acyclic objects.

---

Design brainstorm.

Ideally we pack structs into bits, so that, for example, a Bit32@ fits in 32
bits. This suggests struct fields are packed with bit alignment, not, for
example, byte alignment. This means we'll want to be able to access a value at
bit alignment.

Stack frames will store data as a bundle of bits. Data values will be a bundle
of bits, or a pointer to a bundle of bits.

To start, I want to assume the size of a value in bits is determined solely by
the value's type, and whether we use a pointer or not for the value is
determined solely by the value's type.

Given we'll have values of different sizes at different bit aligned offsets in
stack frames and data structures, we'll need information about the size and
bit offset of a value when accessing it. For example, UnionSelectInstr should
take a bit offset and size in number of bits for the tag.

Values that use pointers will need to be treated differently from those that
don't. For example, StructAccess for a non-pointer value can just turn into a
different offset,size variable, but StructAccess for a pointer value should
load the relevant data from the pointer into the stack frame.

We'll need some way to keep track of where the pointers are in a stack frame
or data value for gc purposes. Otherwise I assume when we move things around,
like passing args or return results, we'll know statically whether we are
dealing with a pointer or non-pointer type so that we can do the
Retain/Release necessary.

Polymorphic functions will need to behave differently based on the types
passed to them, because those types will have different sizes. This could be
tricky, because we already said pointer versus non-pointer types need to be
treated differently, and we can't know if a type will be pointer or
non-pointer before we know the type arguments passed to it. Perhaps we'll want
to do piecewise implementations of the function that can handle all variants
of pointer vs. non-pointer types depending on the arguments? We'll also need a
way to calculate the size of a data type based on the poly argument type, so
we'll need a way to represent that computation.

The C API for interfacing with fble values will have to change, because you'll
need type information to work with them. Maybe they are different sizes, then
maybe we need to generate different C types corresponding to the different
fble types?

If I were to summarize:
* Tracking pointers in objects for GC.
* Tracking pointers in stack frames for aborts.
* Changing the C API to work with fble values.
* Figuring out how to deal with polymorphic types.

Aside from that, hopefully it's a mostly straight forward change to populate
the FbleTc with bit sizes and offsets in typecheck, to propagate those down to
FbleCode in compile, and to update the fble instructions to support these
things.

---

1. Tracking pointers in objects for GC.

The type of an object contains all the information needed to track pointers in
the object. For start, let's say we only do funny packing for struct and union
values. The type of a struct value should contain a list of bit offsets
describing where the pointers are, if any. The type of a union value should
contain a bit offset describing where the pointer is, if any.

Given that structs and values can be packed inside each other, ideally the
type of the object describes all the nested, packed pointers with a list of
bit offsets.

When you free an object, you'll need to know its type somehow. Hopefully
whoever does the freeing knows that.

2. Tracking pointers in stack frames for aborts.
Same idea as for values, except now we have a list of bit offsets describing
the stack frame. I guess we'll also need to know the types of each pointer to
be able to free it recursively?

The only question here is how to store the information so that it's easy to
determine, for any pc, what the list of offsets and types is. We have a few
different options:
* Each instruction that needs it has an explicit list computed at compile
  time.
* We maintain a running list at runtime which individual instructions need to
  update as they go.
* We encode the information in some way so that we can recreate the list given
  a pc on demand.

My feeling is that the most efficient thing would be to encode the list
explicitly for the return and tail call instructions, which are expected
cases, and then write some program that can be used to compute the list for a
given pc for the abort cases. To start that program could just be a lookup
table from pc to (hopefully partially shared) list.

3. Changing the C API
There are two considerations: how to convey the type information necessary to
manipulate values and how to refer to values.

We could either require the user to provide the type information, or we could
bundle the type information with the value at the interface. I feel like
having the user provide the type information will be better for the long run,
so maybe start by trying that.

How to refer to values? Well, we have a maximum fixed size for a value, so we
could define some FbleValue type passed around by value that is at least that
size. Seems like a waste for describing smaller size values though. We could
use a pointer and a bit offset to describe an arbitrary bit in memory. Then
it's a question of who keeps track of the backing memory for non-pointer
values?

No. Seems like if we deem our maximum fixed sized value small enough to be
worth copying at runtime, it should be fine for the user, even in the worst
case of only using one of the bits available.

Or perhaps we should provide the user with some sort of heap API they can
allocate their own values out of, then always pass around pointer and bit
offset? The user can have them allocated on the stack that way if they want.

Another possibility would be to use different C types for different fble
types. I worry about polymorphic types though.

4. How to deal with polymorphic types.

It's tedious, but I think straight forward. We'll need some way to describe
and execute a program to compute field offsets given the size of a polymorphic
type passed in. That program needs to handle integer variables, max and sum.

---

(2) sounds the most independent from everything else. What if we start there?
What if we use dwarf, or some dwarf like thing to describe the location and
live values for every instruction in a function? That's information that could
be useful to a debugger and also for unwinding the stack.

One cool thing about this is we could show stack traces for aborts, not just
the last frame. Assuming we'll unwind one frame at a time.

The following instructions need to support abort:
 STRUCT_ACCESS, UNION_ACCESS, UNION_SELECT, CALL, REF_DEF, FORK.

The following instructions don't:
 STRUCT_VALUE, UNION_VALUE, JUMP, FUNC_VALUE, GET, PUT, LINK, COPY, REF_VALUE,
 RETURN, TYPE.

Is it worth special casing individual instructions, or should we provide the
info for all the instructions just because we can? My preference would be not
to be instruction specific, except for return and tail call, where they need
the info for normal operation.

I guess the high level idea is:
* Add some info to FbleCode that can be used to give the location and list of
  live variables for any pc in the code block. Remove location fields of
  individual instructions.
* On abort, unwind the stack a frame at a time using this information instead
  of checking for NULL / non-NULL values to release.
* Sounds like we'll want explicit release of all values using instructions,
  as part of RETURN and TAIL_CALL, and, perhaps, adding back explicit
  RELEASE instructions?
* Then we don't need to NULL out stack frames when we initialize them.
* Let's print full stack traces on abort instead of just the last location,
  just because we can.

We could consider using the dwarf spec for line locations. Let's see if that
isn't overly complicated for my case. It might not be enough for maintaining
stack maps. No, I think dwarf is overly general for my needs. Just start with
something simple and worry about optimizing or integrating with dwarf later.

---

For a compact way of representing stack maps for all instructions, we could
have a little language with the following instructions:

For the sequence of ops to apply to get to a particular pc:
 * incr pc - to say when the next pc starts
 * branch - to say to jump over a number of instructions if the goal is to
            find a pc in a particular range.
    The branch condition will be based on the target pc to reach.
 * jump - to say to jump to a specific instruction.

For tracking location:
 * set file
 * set line
 * set col

For tracking stackmaps:
 * add pointer
 * remove pointer

Idea is you run the program from the start targeting a particular pc, as a
result you get a location and list of offsets. That's your stackmap. Hopefully
there isn't too much redundancy when expressed as a diff this way.

That said, there's no reason to start with something fancy like this. We
already have all the location information needed. The real new functionality
to add is stackmaps for aborts. The easiest way to start is to just add to
each instruction (or each instruction that might abort?) what the stackmap is.
We only need a more compressed version if memory becomes an issue.

Perhaps, in terms of API, we want to add a new function analogous to the
FbleExecutable 'run' function, called 'abort', which aborts the thread at a
given pc.

---

Next step: let's see if we can pack values into structs and unions at least,
if not stack frames as well.

We don't have to worry about changing the FbleValue* storage for the user API:
just leave it as 32 bits, or whatever the native pointer size is. But we do
need to pass to the API enough information about the type of the value we are
working with for it to know if it is packed data and how it is packed.

The idea is: we have FbleTypeValue store the type information we are
interested in, and we make it possible to construct type values by
composition. We generate instructions to construct FbleTypeValues at runtime
that are needed for a function. To avoid excessive overhead, we'll compute
these type values as part of constructing function values, passing the type
values as static variables. For polymorphic types, we'll construct the type
values after the type arguments have been applied.

What I'm not going to worry about yet is the fact that often we know the type
concretely at compile time, so we could avoid constructing the type value at
runtime. This way things will be consistent from polymorphic to
non-polymorphic types. And don't worry about packing stack frames yet.

I think this will be a very good step forward. The key thing to start is
figure out how to pass an FbleTypeValue anywhere we call the struct and union
value APIs, and make sure everyone who interacts with struct and union values
is using the APIs.

Survey of use:

* FbleNewStructValue, FbleNewEnumValue, should take an FbleTypeValue*.
 - We know the type to use for Unit.
 - StructValueInstr should take the type as an argument to be found on the
   stack.
 - Users like fble-md5 know the type they need to pass.
* FbleStructValueAccess
 - Instr should take the type as an argument to be found on the stack.
 - Users like fble-md5 know the type they need to pass.
* GC Refs needs to know the type of the value, including for subfields
  somehow. Including knowing the types of static args to functions.

GC looks like the hard part to me. Some options:
* Track types separately from values. This looks like it would need
  cooperation from the heap implementation though.
* Track types as part of values, for values allocated on the heap. Then we
  need some way for GC to know if a value is allocated on the heap or not.
  Maybe that means setting the least significant bit to 1 if not allocated on
  the heap, and not packing heap allocated values at all.

Ideally we track types separately from values in GC. I think this is doable.
GC only needs to track some abstract notion of type for a heap allocated
object. That makes sense to support in general.

For example:
* heap callback could take a void* type in addition to void* obj.
* refs could take a void* type in addition to void* obj.
* on_free could take a void* type in addition to void* obj.
* new heap object takes a type.
* Retain takes a type?
* Release takes a type?
* Add ref takes types?

That way heap can be responsible for storing the void* type for a heap
allocated object, and the refs callback function can skip over any values that
the type says are not heap allocated.

Perhaps the type we want to pass around is not heap allocated? But types can
be recursive. Perhaps it uses its own heap?

I think it's going to be most straight forward to store the type with the heap
allocated object. Too bad about the overhead, but my guess is we net save by
no longer making things like units and booleans be heap allocated.

Actually, why isn't it enough to store the type with the FbleValue*
allocation? We'll have access to that for determining refs. Yeah. Let's start
that way. No need to mess with gc, and it should support references from
values to types and back just fine.

It's seems unfortunate to have to pass a type with the FbleValue APIs when the
value itself will hold the type. I wonder... what if the value could hold a
function that does the refs callback? Then we could generate a special
function at compile time for all the types we care about? That doesn't save
any space though... Might be more efficient, but doesn't save any space.

I guess the summary is this:
1. Define the FbleTypeValue structure that will allow us to track offsets and
   sizes and heap allocatedness of types.
2. Add an FbleTypeValue field to every FbleValue*.
3. Have users pass FbleTypeValue when constructing and accessing values.
4. Now we're free to do whatever packing we want, with FbleTypeValue always
   available to know what's packed in what way.

Perhaps we could have one of the FbleTypeValue's be HEAP_ALLOCATED, which
means the actual type info is stored in the heap allocated pointer? That makes
it easier to deal with things like functions, where they have the same
function type but potentially different captured static values.

