The State of Fble
=================
Here we take a step back and look at the overall state of the fble project.

Language
--------
The language has mostly stabilized. It's not changing much. It's starting to
be my preferred language to write programs in. It's actually pretty nice to
use.

The biggest issues with the language at this point are:
* It's too slow to run programs. This is a pretty hard blocker for things like
  the space invaders game.

* Poor modularity support. Most notably no support for abstract data types.
  That may be the reason I haven't made use of the module access controls at
  all. Who knows what the story will be for modular compilation or package
  version control.

* It feels like more cognitive overhead to program in than it ought to. I
  think this could be related to how, with nested conditions, the flow of code
  jumps all over the source file. Compare to C programs, where you can write
  programs in a much more linear fashion by returning early in if statements.

If we can focus on addressing these three things next, that would be great.

For the performance issue we have under way the experimental elaborate feature
of the language. It's is not fully flushed out how that feature will work for
things like loops and processes. It's really in an exploratory phase. I should
push forward with the exploration to see what we learn.

Honestly, even under my most optimistic interpretation, I don't expect the
elaborate feature to address the performance issue. There's something
fundamental about a 64 bit add taking on the order of 64 operations instead of
a single native machine instruction. Performance is the biggest risk for fble.

For modularity, I have a proposal in the works for abstract data types. It
would be good to get an initial version of the proposal implemented and play
around with it.

For cognitive overhead, I haven't thought about how we could improve things
yet. It's worth spending some thought on it. I think this is a relatively
minor issue at this point compared to performance.

Library
-------
The library has intentionally been left to grow organically as needed by the
fble programs I write. It's got some nice stuff, but deserves a well thought
reworking of all the APIs when the time comes. Mostly I want to wait on
language support for abstract data types before even thinking about how to
clean up the library.

Tools
-----
Running, profiling and code coverage feel good to me. The biggest thing
missing is a debugger, which I've wanted many times. But every time I've
figured out the issue with much less effort than developing a debug entails.

I don't think I'm ready to take on the project of a debugger yet. It might be
good to wait until we've made more progress on language performance, in case
that means using compiled code in such a way that we can reuse a standard
debugger.

Apps
----
The only app that really matters at this point is the invaders game. We should
finish the app so we can use it to understand how far we have to go
performance wise to make fble useful.

Summary
-------
I suggest the following areas of focus for fble next, in no particular order:

* Finish invaders game functionally.
* Implement proposal for abstract data types.
* Continue exploration of elaborate feature to improve performance.
* Burn down easy to fix TODOs.
* Spend some time thinking about cognitive overheads and what, if anything, we
  can do to address them.

That's plenty of different stuff to work on. I wouldn't take on any more
before these things are closed out.
