Literals
========

The way literals work in fble is going to cause problems for the standard
library I expect, so let's think about them some more.

Current primary use of literals: strings and integers.

Problems with literals

The structure problem:
* The type for a literal has to be a single flat list of all possible options,
  which means we can't express structured desired in the type. For example, I
  can't say Char@ is a union of Digit@ and Upper@ and Lower@, even though that
  would be nice for organization purposes. It doesn't scale to require a type
  with millions of fields to support unicode character literals.

The performance problem:
* It's natural to use integer literals inline as if they had no cost, but
  something like Int|42 is expensive in practice to re-execute on every
  function call. I have to spot these in profiles and pull out a separate
  definition like Int@ 42 = Int|42, which is a bit tedious.

The validity problem:
* The only thing a compiler can do to validate your literal is make sure it
  is limited to a specific subset of characters. For example, if I want a
  literal for floating points, the compiler couldn't tell us that 1.1.4 is
  invalid.

Here's a possible solution to the structure problem:
* Generalize the literal element type to allow nested literal element types.

For example, say Char@ = +(Digit@ digit, Letter@ letter). When looking for a
value to match '4', for example, we don't see it at the level of Char@, so
check in Digit@ and Letter@. Since we find the Unit@ field '4' in Digit@, we
can automatically form Char@(digit: Digit@(4: Unit)). We just have to figure
how to handle the case where there are multiple matches. For example:
Foo@ = +(Digit@ a, Digit@ b). Do we chose '4' from 'a' or from 'b'?

The performance problem is, I think, not something to worry about now. It's
not specific to literals, profiling will show you when it is an issue, and
it's pretty easy to work around when you care about performance. Let's not say
anything more there.

The validity problem, I fear, is fundamental. It's the fundamental tradeoff
between allowing for custom literals. Either you don't have custom literals
and you build knowledge of your literals into the compiler, or you allow
custom literals and then the compiler can't help you out.

In practice, I don't think it's so bad to detect literal errors at runtime. A
decent test suite with code coverage should do the trick.

Let's imagine we come up with some way to tell the compiler how to precisely
validate a literal at compile time. To compose well, we really ought to be
able to reuse fble code for that, and be able to define literals on the fly
nested in functions, where we are not allowed to evaluate that code at
runtime.

My current approach for the specification is a list of subsequences.

Let's think about unicode string literals now, or more broadly the space of
literals.

Conceptually I think it's right to say a literal is a packed sequence of flat
values. It doesn't have internal structure beyond that, that's the whole
point. Because otherwise you would express the structure using normal function
calls in fble.

I like the idea of expressing a literal in the same encoding as the source
code. Then we can define the literal and break it apart into pieces without
having to rely on any particular encoding for the source file. But for unicode
that feels painful.

If we can treat a word in the source code as representing encoded data, and
then directly operate on the data, then we could make a string literal by
assuming utf8 (say) and not have to know the names of all the unicode
characters. We just parse into code points in a general way and be done with
it. That is, I want to leverage more structure than just 'unicode character',
because there are a lot of those.

Slight digression, but I might mention I sometimes have a desire for 'file
literals', where an entire literal is specified in a separate file. I'm not
sure how practical that is, but it would be pleasing to just point to a file
and say its contents are the literal value.

Can I magically come up with a way to pull everything together and deliver a
beautiful, perfect strategy for literals in fble?

---

A literal can be:
A. a sequence of bytes.
B. a sequence of unicode characters.
C. a sequence of word prefixes.
D. a sequence of bits.

Because that's how we are expressing it. Specifically, it is getting encoded
as a sequence of bytes in a word, where a word is clearly defined according to
the fble spec, and defined in such a way that a sequence of bytes that form a
single utf8 character doesn't get split up.

Except that's not true, right? Because we use single quote as a delimiter, and
we don't check if the single quote is part of a multibyte character. Same for
any other whitespace and punctuation that comes at the end of a non-quoted
word. We don't check if it's actually inside some unicode character.

In other words, even though I thought the lex spec was unicode independent,
it's not.

Or, the spec is fine if we interpret it with respect to a sequence of
characters. It could work for any encoding: ascii, utf8, utf16, etc. But in
that case the implementation works for a (strange) subset of utf8. That is,
most, but not all of utf8, which seems like a bad idea.

I see no reason to introduce the notion of a byte into the fble lexer spec.
The only thing we care about are characters. That suggests to me that it's up
to the implementation to decide how to interpret a file: as ascii, utf8,
utf16, etc. In practice, on linux, we ought to be using utf8.

If the spec is about characters and not about bytes, then the literal should
not be about bytes. It should not be about bits.

That leaves two options: characters or prefixes of words. But, since a prefix
of a word is a sequence of characters in this new interpretation, doesn't seem
like there is any difference to me. Aside from the practical difference: if
I'm storing my words internally as a utf8 sequence of bytes representing
characters, then expressing things more generally as a sequence of characters
let's me interpret a sequence of characters as a sequence of utf8 bytes, do
the matching internally based on a sequence of utf8 bytes, and have everything
work out.

Sounds like I need to think more carefully about fble source file encodings.

Fble source file encodings today:
* ascii works.
* utf8 mostly works.

Let's look at what some other languages specify.

C99:
* Says there is some possibly multibyte character set for source files, which
  may differ from the character set used during execution. With some minimal
  requirements on the source character set.

  Maybe this is a bit old of a spec to use as reference. Check more recent
  specs and other languages before deciding based on this example.

---

Some more thoughts on literals, in case I haven't already said it:

* I want the language spec to describe source code in terms of characters,
  without any particular encoding. The user describes a literal as a sequence
  of these characters.

* The implementation has to know the source character encoding. It definitely
  ought not to make any assumptions about whatever representation or encoding
  for characters is used by library code.

* The library code knows what representation it wants for characters. It also
  knows the character encoding its source code is written in, but maybe it
  doesn't know the character encoding used by users of the library.

The two most reasonable options here are:
1. Continue with the current approach: the only way to decode a literal is
via matching against explicit source code character sequences.

2. Define as part of the language spec how literal characters are encoded.

If we do (2), we could say: utf8, code points, etc. I'm a little inclined to
say it should be a sequence of bits, because literal already has a notion of
sequence, it seems silly to specify a literal as a sequence of sequence of
bits when it could just be a sequence of bits.

Another idea is to have a special type for literals. This could go with
approach (1) or (2). The potential advantage here is we don't have to make any
assumptions about list types in the language spec or implementation.

---

Questions about character encodings: can you open a file in linux or windows
with character encodings other than ascii and UTF8?

Read about: setlocale LC_CTYPE options.

man charmaps, /usr/share/i18n/charmaps has a bunch of different specifications
for character maps? The UTF8 file has an explicit list of around 50K
characters. But sounds like a lot of these different charmaps may be legacy,
and everyone uses unicode now? See man charsets.

Looks like python has an option to specify different encodings when opening a 
file. Check out the python codecs module for options. Looks like it pulls from
LC_CTYPE by default.

The sense I'm getting is that there are a lot of different ways to encode
characters in text that you might want to chose, unicode or not.

---

javac has a -encoding option to specify the source file encoding when you
compile it, defaulting to the platform default.

From what I've read, it makes sense to me to specify the source file encoding
as whatever your platform supports via standard methods. As long as we can
interpret as a sequence of characters and identify the punctuation characters.

There is a question about what character set is used internally for
representing words. Unicode seems like the obvious option, or some explicit
subset. But then you could name variables and fields using some obscure
characters in your character set that people can't express in their character
sets.

Those people could always use utf8, or another unicode source encoding. Or we
could provide unicode escape sequences for words to allow those. So I don't
think this is too big a deal in practice. But we do have to specify in the
spec that words, internally, are limited to unicode characters? Not sure.

Coming back to literals and Char@. I would like to be able to (even if I chose
not to) represent Char@ as a unicode codepoint Int@. Which means I don't want
it to be restricted by its use as a literal. But I still would like it to be
usable as a literal.

It's fairly natural. We just need to specify a map from word to Char@ value of
our choice. But I want to make that map composable: Char = Digit + Letter. The
nicest thing for composition is to reuse fble functions. Which suggests we
have some explicit literal type in fble. It's very doable, but the slight
overlap with standard library strings and characters is concerning, and I
haven't found an approach I like yet for that route.

---

Another round of thoughts.

A word is a sequence of source encoded characters. A literal is a sequence of
source encoded characters. I see no reason for a literal to be anything else.
It's not a sequence of prefixes. It's not a sequence of ascii characters, or
of bytes. It's a sequence of characters.

The implementation should have a way to guess or be told the character
encoding for the source file when it is read. The implementation has to know
how to interpret from those characters which are the punctuation, whitespace,
end of line, or other from the concrete syntax of the language. Anything that
is 'other', it doesn't need to know about, it just needs some way of
representing, checking for equality or lack thereof.

In practice, my implementation will use utf8 or wchar_t as the internal
character representation, essentially supporting any unicode character.

Let's say we have some arbitrary source encoding that the implementation
supports. That means the implementation can distinguish between every
different character in the source encoding. Now imagine the implementation
supports two different source encodings with some characters expressible in
one encoding but not the other.

Then the implementation needs to support the union of both encodings. Which
means I can express the implementation character set as the union of the all
encodings the implementation supports. Let's think of some options here: ascii
only, unicode, charmaps (as a translation layer from the source encoding to
the implementation character set), some future encoding that includes all
languages used by all aliens in the universe. If taking the charmap approach,
in general a character is represented as a (variable width) sequence of bytes.
That's how we should represent characters internally: a variable width
sequence of bytes using multibyte functions to see when one character ends and
the next starts.

The way I map from a users source character encoding to the specific
punctuation characters we care about in the language is via the
implementation's source and execution character encodings. I guess it
technically goes: '.' in the implementation source gets mapped to the
implementation's execution character set. '.' in the fble source gets
mapped to the implementation's execution character set. We can do
comparison at the level of the implementation's execution character set. Thus
the implementation's execution character set must support at least the
punctuation and other required characters of the fble concrete syntax. It
should support enough more to write reasonable names.

Okay? So fble implementation has a supported execution character set that
includes the fundamental syntax characters of the fble language. Every other
character in the implementation is represented as as sequence of bytes and
interpreted for equality checks via charmaps and locale setup when the
implementation is reading the fble file in question. No need to say anything
about unicode at this point for the fble language.

Thus, internally we store words/literals as a sequence of bytes. Not
necessarily unicode. Now I need to bridge the gap and somehow make a sequence
of source characters, which is encoded as a sequence of bytes, into fble at
runtime.

We can deal with bringing sequences into fble at runtime. Using a list type.
It's simple enough. I'm not worried about that. So let's focus on individual
characters.

Consider three different options: Unicode, Bytes, or existing Char@.

There are too many unicode characters. It seems impractical to have to list
them all down somewhere in the library to be able to use them all in the same
literal. We need more structure.

But the discussion above, somehow, led me exactly where we need to go: bytes.
Now I don't like hard coding bytes into the language. Characters maybe,
because you clearly have to have characters in your source file. Bits maybe,
because it's the simplest type for representing information. But bytes? How
arbitrary. Why 8 bits at a time?

Anyway, we could hard code a byte type in the language. Where would that leave
us in terms of literals? You get a sequence of bytes per letter, yes, but you
need to interpret that sequence of bytes somehow. For my stdlib Unicode Char@
library, how could I interpret that sequence of bytes? Well... you would have
to specify an encoding? What encoding makes sense?

I've missed something here. The source file is a sequence of bytes. We
preserve that sequence of bytes in the implementation. We preserve that
sequence of bytes at runtime (e.g. in compiled code). Which we then need to
compare against a sequence of bytes from a different source file?

No. We have to canonicalize. We can't just leave the original source sequence
of bytes in the implementation. The charmap mapping between wchar_t (execution
character set code points) and source encoding bytes is only valid with
respect to the specific source file being read. As soon as we get out of that
context, that sequence of bytes becomes meaningless.

Every sequence of bytes I carry around has to have an encoding specified for
it. We could leave it as the original source encoding, or we could map
everything into a common, generic encoding (utf8?) and know that everything is
encoded with the common encoding.

Let's assume the implementation has a sequence of bytes and known encoding for
a literal. That pair, sequence of bytes + encoding, can describe any possible
character in any possible character set supported by the implementation. It is
the union of all character sets. If we chose to limit that to utf8 in the
implementation, well, that's an implementation choice. 

Now then, how do we turn that sequence of bytes + encoding into an fble
runtime value? Options are:
* Bring both the sequence of bytes and encoding name into the fble world.
* Pick a standard encoding (utf8?), canonicalize all literals into that
  encoding (presumably at the time we parse the literal), and return the
  sequence of bytes in that encoding.

Unicode is pretty good. If I'm going to limit things to a standard encoding,
may as well pick unicode as the character set, and whatever encoding of that
is easiest to bring into an fble value. Otherwise we need some external
registry of character encoding to consult, which effectively limits us anyway.
Unicode is that external registry.

Straw proposal: a builtin character type. You can do union-select like switch
on builtin character values using your source encoding so you don't have to
know how it is encoded internally. But we additionally say this is a unicode
character, and provide a way to convert between the character and some
specific encoding of that as a standard fble struct/union data structure.

Now we get a decent mix of both worlds: if you don't want to know anything
about unicode or how it is encoded, you can deconstruct characters solely via
your source character encoding. But if you want, you can also read the
character's unicode code point programmatically, without having to express the
character in source code anywhere. That's the key.

Let's review potential encodings of unicode for me to use:
* Raw structure: 128 groups * 256 planes * 256 rows * 256 cols: 256 ^ 4
* Hex encoded: [16], if variable, or 16 ^ 8 if fixed width
* UTF-8: [256]
* UTF-16, UTF-32, but I would prefer UTF-8 over those for sure.

I don't see a standard encoding based on bits, but presumably I could come up
with one that is well defined. If a bit tedious to use. I like the idea of
variable length. Seems more efficient to me. So, either variable length Bit,
Hex, or Byte.

In practice, the only use I imagine for this encoding will be getting
character literals into my unicode Char@ representation, which will be an
Int@. It may as well be specified as a variable length sequence of Bit@, from
least significant bit to most significant bit. Note, this is not UTF8
converted into a bit stream.

You know what? I'm really tempted to have a builtin library function that can
convert a builtin letter to Char@. We can do whatever conversion we want there
in native. No need to bring in any specific character encoding into the fble
language spec. The builtin is tied to the combination of implementation +
library, which is exactly what we need.

Cool. That helps to clarify. In summary, I'm saying a character literal is a
list of characters from an arbitrary execution character set chosen by the
implementation. I'll provide a way to deconstruct a character via source
character encoding. Any library that wants to access the internal structure of
the implementation for characters can use a builtin for that.

---

Now to discuss how to represent builtin lists and characters in fble for the
purposes of list and character literals. I know the abstract interface I want.
I just need to decide on the syntax and how to encode things.

Let's start with sequence. We have:
* A polymorphic type representing a sequence of elements of type X@.
* A way to construct a list of values.
* A way to test of the list is empty or not.
* If the list is not empty, a way to get the first value and the rest of the
  list.

That assumes a streaming list, not a random access list. There are lots of
different ways you could represent it in theory. Maybe we bias it so it's
easier to get at the last element first, or some element in the middle first.

Things to chose:
* The structure of the list.
* The names of fields of the list.

Let me leave it there for now and move on to characters. We have:
* A basic type representing a character.
* A way to construct a character via source file character encoding.
* A way to switch on the character via source file character encoding.
* Might be nice to be able to test if two characters are equal?
  Which is slightly more general than testing if a character is a specific
  values. But what for?

I think a special type and syntax for character makes more sense than trying
to put it into a struct/union? I guess there are two options:
* Represent a character as an arbitrary list of bits.
* Have a builtin type.

Let's compare. If I have an arbitrary list of bits and a way to turn a
character literal into an list of bits, that gives me a way to check for
equality, which gives a way to switch on a character via if/else. No fancy
syntax needed.

If I have special syntax, it doesn't really help anything syntactically.
Though it does prevent you from constructing your own sequences of bits, but
who cares? We never have to go back from sequence of bits to characters.

I'm going to be honest, that's pretty tempting. I could even, if I want,
recommend a variable bit-length unicode encoding as part of fble, and avoid
the need for a builtin? Or say it's an implementation defined sequence of
bits: fine as long as two different implementations don't mix. We can
standardize that as part of whatever implementation standardization we need
when we have more than one implementation of fble.
   
Let's consider the other approach though, just to get a feel. It wouldn't be
too hard to have a builtin syntax for a character. For example:

  |@ x = |h; # but is |... a single character or a list?
  x.?(h: ...);

Equality is not natural to express with a builtin.

I would also want a builtin list type then, to be consistent?
  []@ l = [a, b, c];
  l.?(...)

No. It's weird. It's odd. It's different. I have a way to express data
structures, let's re-use it. I already know how to make it generic to field
names.

  Foo[...]

Foo is a function with a data type matching the pattern:

  @L = +(*(T@, L@), *()), for some type T@.

  Foo|...

Foo is a function with a data type matching the pattern above, where T@
matches the pattern itself, with it's own T@ as +(*(), *()).

We could use Bit@, we could use Bool@.

Question: what do you think about representing a word as a raw sequence of
bits, rather than a sequence of characters where characters are represented as
bits?
  
No. I don't think that works. We wouldn't be able to clearly distinguish
between separate characters.

What do I think about hard coding the field names for the list and bit types
used here? If I did that, then [...] could be a list, and |... could be a
string directly in the language. Though application is slightly more tedious:
Foo([...]) and Foo(|...) compared to Foo[...] and Foo|....

It would be easier to explain the language spec, perhaps. But I think this
it's fine to require the user to provide the type information via their
function.

Cool! I think, in theory, I now have a complete proposal for how to update
literals to support unicode in the standard library. Let's summarize.

* Canonicalize character set encoding of words in implementation
 - Either by using wchar_t* instead of char* for words,
 - Or by translating input words into utf-8 encoding,
 - Or by forcing (for now) utf8 encoded source files and using utf8 encoding.
* Update lexer to respect the character encoding specified in locale.
 - e.g. don't look into the middle of a multibyte character for an ascii
   punctuation.
 - Add spec tests to verify it does this properly.
* Update the spec for literals to require a list of bits for letters.
 - In the spec, the specific sequence of bits for each letter is left
   implementation defined.
* In the /Std/Char% library, make an assumption about the implementation
  defined sequence of bits for a letter to convert to unicode.
 - We can do this in a builtin rather than .fble source if that makes things
   more comfortable.
* Str function now takes a list of bits rather than a list of chars.
 - Anywhere we assume |'...' gives a list of chars will need to be changed to
   use Str literal explicitly for conversion.
* Update Int function to use List<Bit> equality for |'0', etc. rather than
  switch on digit.
* Char@ uses Int@ unicode codepoint internally.

Let's take a step back and evaluate.

One more high level concern with literals I want to note down:
* It seems a pain to have to convert the internal representation to an fble
  list for things like Int@, where we could otherwise avoid the intermediate
  list allocation.

The answer to that, for now, is I shouldn't be micro-optimizing performance
that way. Don't assume conversion to and from a list of bits is expensive.
Perhaps the implementation can do that all for you at compile time so it is
completely free.

First discussion topic: Validation in the new scheme does not exist.
Second discussion topic: List of List of Bit versus List of Bit.

---

Down the rabbit hole we go.

First discussion topic: Validation in the new scheme does not exist.

There are a subset of syntaxes where all possible sequences are valid. Int as
a sequence of digits, Char as a sequence of characters are sort-of examples.
But in practice, and in general, that's not the case. Consider the following
examples of common use of literals in languages:
* int x = 34L;
* char c = '\x003';
* int y = -3;
* float x = 2e13;

In all of those cases, there are invalid sequences. In practice there are
invalid sequences, and we need a way to handle that. Rather than sort of
hackishly support some limited subset of validation at compile time, let's not
do any validation at compile time. People will have to get used to validate on
their own, presumably via test suites.

So, no worries on the validation front.
  
Second discussion topic: List of List of Bit versus List of Bit.

Let's say we specified as part of fble that an implementation must support
exactly the set of unicode characters, no more no less (more on that in a
bit?).

Let's say we specified that literal character strings are UTF8 encoded, and
the resulting sequence of bytes turned into a sequence of bits using least
significant bit first in each byte. Now there is no need to talk in terms of
characters, literals can be thought of entirely in terms of strings.

What's nice about this:
* Spec is simpler. A function supports literals if it takes a list of bits.
  Rather than a list of list of bits.
* We standardize the representation of literals, rather than saying it is
  implementation defined. We can legitimately write standard library fble code
  to convert a literal to a sequence of unicode code points with resorting to
  assumptions about the implementation.
* No need for the awkward '|x' can be a character but '|xy' cannot.

This means we would go back to prefix matching on literals, but it is
legitimate now, because we can break it down into corresponding character
sequences via our knowledge of UTF8 encoding.

You wouldn't have to know about UTF8 to make use of literals, but you could.

Next topic: do we have to define the implementation character set in practice?

Uh, I think what I said before still stands: there is an implementation
character set. Anything you can convert into that is allowed...

So really there are two different things I'm thinking about here:

1. Cross-implementation compatibility. Wouldn't it be nice for you to be able
to write implementation independent library code and have it work? That
requires that the character sets used by all implementations are the same.
Otherwise you could write something that works in one implementation but not
another. Thus: for standardization, unicode would be nice to specify as part
of the concrete syntax of the language.

2. Should we require a unicode based source encoding?
Let's imagine some library uses UTF-8 and names its functions and fields using
a weird mix of UTF-8 characters. Now say someone wants to use a limited
character encoding, but they want to use those library functions. They have no
way to use those library functions in their encoding. So they are forced into,
in general, a unicode character encoding. Not so nice?

We could address this by adding support for unicode escape characters in the
syntax for words. For example, in a quoted word, we say you can write:

  'foo\u1331bar', or some such.

We decode the escape sequence to a unicode character. We say in the spec that
your source character encoding must be able to represent '\', 'u', and digits.
As long as that's the case, you can refer to any entity. It's standardized. I
like that.

The next concern: my implementation doesn't care about word names, as long as
it can tell where bytes start, what the punctuation characters are, and if two
words are equal. Is it the case that you could have two different sequences of
unicode characters that refer to the same string? If so, that sounds
unpleasant. Would I allow them to be used interchangeably for a field? Would I
have them generate the same UTF8 string of bits if used in a literal?

I need to learn more about unicode to answer that question.

Anyway, summary of latest straw proposal:
* Add unicode as name encoding to language spec.
* Add unicode escape sequence to quoted word in concrete syntax.
* Fix lexer for arbitrary source character encodings.
* Type for literal is now list of bits, which are 
  unicode UTF8 encoding of the word, in least significant bit to most
  significant bit order.

---

Exploration of syntax for unicode escapes in quoted words.

In go, you have either: \uXXXX, or \UXXXXXXXX.

I think I prefer variable width. So my proposal is, within a quoted word:

  ' [hex] '

With no space inside.

For example:
  'Hello. Here is a unicode char: '1234', and another: '10ffd'' x = ...

Hex digits can be upper or lower? Sounds reasonable to me.

If you have this, the no need to escape single quote. You could express it as
unicode instead. It's hex 27. So:

  'I can'27't seem to put it directly, you know?'

Sounds reasonable to me. Not any worse than

  'I cant''t seem to put it directly, you know?'

Decent proposal. How do I feel about it? The syntax is fine. I can try it. I
can live with it. How do I feel about the need for it? It's really a question
of how I feel about having the fble spec depend on unicode at all.

If we are going to hard code unicode into the spec, then:
* We could require a specific unicode source character encoding. Seems unfair?
* We can use unicode code point literals to allow any source character
  encoding with hex digits and punctuation.
* We can clearly specify character literals as sequences of bits.
  And easily implement a unicode Char@ in the standard library.

If we want to avoid unicode entirely in the spec, make pretty much no
assumptions, then...

It's interesting that C99 says execution character set is implementation
defined, but it still supports unicode character literals. If the
implementation doesn't support the unicode character in question? Oh well? Or
illegal? Or sequence of bytes?

Even if we didn't have unicode, we could define any character set in terms of
code points. The implementation has an execution character set, that could be
different from the source encoding. In practice, my implementation will use...
utf8? Or wchar_t? wchar_t is part of C99, so sounds reasonable to use.

So, how can we share code between two different implementations?

It's two stages, just like before:
* The option to support different source encodings implies we need an
  execution character set that can handle all (implementation supported)
  source encodings.
* That gives the need for representing an execution character that you can't
  express in your source encoding. The best you can do is give a code point
  integer number.
* Now we can use an explicit code point in a source file that supports
  encoding the character directly. The behavior of the program depends on
  whether a given code point matches a particular encoded character or not.
* To be portable within a given implementation, that behavior must be the
  same, regardless of the source encoding of characters. This is based on the
  idea we should be able to convert any source file to a different character
  encoding without changing its meaning. For example, 0x27 must always be
  single quote, regardless of the source level encoding.
* To be portable across different implementations, the same thing applies.

Imagine a non-unicode world, where we just have numbers for characters. We
have platform specific character encodings. The implementation knows how to
convert a source character to an execution character. An execution character
has a well defined number. We can use 'XXXX' style escapes to provide the
number directly, no need to say anything about unicode at this point.

You can't meaningfully use 'XXXX' style escapes unless you know the
implementation's character set. Even if the implementation treats weird
characters as abstract entities, it still needs to do equality comparison.

So you need to know the implementation's character set, and to be portable,
all the different implementations need to use the same character set, and so
we ought to specify that in the language spec. And unicode is the clear and
natural choice.

I could not specify the character set, and say it's implicit. Just like how I
am planning to treat charmaps and locale and platform depending encodings
implicitly. And hope everyone picks the right thing.

Except, if we want to do unicode character literals from structure, as a
sequence of bits, we can only do it if we know the execution's character set
and can map from that to unicode.

Let's be honest, regardless of how I deal with character literals in the
language, I require the implementation to use unicode internally to be able to
implement a unicode Char@ type in the standard library. If I give access to
code points in the language, I have to know what they are and that means they
ought to be unicode. If I do pattern matching, I have to list all the possible
characters, and that means the implementation ought to support unicode.

The only other option is to limit the standard library character literal
support to a small subset of unicode (even if the library itself supports full
unicode).

Two approaches being weighed:
A. Existing approach, no mention of unicode in language. Execution character
set is implementation defined. No universal character encoding. Character
literals limited to small subset of unicode. Some subsets of character
literals are supported in some implementations but not others.
B. Unicode approach. Language spec depends on unicode. We can have universal
character support, and can use structured character literals.

Is there another option? Because unicode is pretty arbitrary. The important
thing about unicode is that it is the widely used standard. If there was some
other widely used standard, we could just as well use that. If, in 100 years
from now, there's a completely different standard that everyone uses, I would
want the language to depend on that.

Can we substitute 'widely standardized extended character set' in the spec in
place of unicode?

We could, if we didn't say that Char@ in the standard library was unicode. But
in that case, we don't want it to be unicode, we want it to match the 'widely
standardized extended character set'.

Yes. I like this. Assume the existence of a common widely supported extended
character set (e.g. unicode). Say the implementation should support that. Have
support for universal characters. Implement the Char@ library in terms of
that. Define literals as......

Literals should not be defined in terms of utf8. They should be defined as an
abstract encoding of a list of universal character descriptions.

Then everything works great.

Now, given a literal as a sequence of characters, where each character
corresponds to a non-negative integer, how shall I represent that in an fble
data type?

From before, it would be nice if we can do it as a flat list, where we have a
prefix encoding so we can distinguish between individual elements of the list.

We would want three tokens: 0, 1, D, where 'D' stands for delimiter.

For example, the sequence [4, 1, 2, 5], can be represented as:

  100D1D10D101D

Remind me how we encode lists again in practice. If this was a list, it would
be: 'C' for cons, 'N' for nil:

  C4C1C2C5N

And encoding each number as a list of bits using 'c' and 'n' for cons and nil:

  Cc1c0c0nCc1nCc1c0nCc1c0c1nN

Or... why not match source code? Define a type with hex digits and a separator
(single quote).

 '4'1'2'5

Or do we need to double quote it?

 ''4''1''2''5''

In other words, I take your character literal, I convert it into a fully
universalized string, and I give you that string. The character set and
specification for universalized is a well defined part of the language spec.

That's nice.

Should we let people pick their own name, or hard code the type? I think we
should hard code the type. This is different from lists. Should we hard code
the type for lists?

How would I hardcode the type for list, based solely on the list literal
syntax?

  [4, 1, 2, 5] in the syntax becomes...

  ']' for nil
  ',' for cons
  '[' for head?
  ??? for tail?

  '[]' for nil

No, I don't see nearly so natural a way of doing it. Let's keep list as is.
Anyway, list is likely something to be a library, universal character sequence
not so much.

Can I generalize the universal character syntax to be more compact for this
case? For example, maybe we say: single quote followed by one or more hex digits,
followed by an optional single quote. So we could do:

  'I can'27t seem to right this'

  'Double encoded: '27'27'

Then we can use:

 '4'1'2'5

Where ' signals there is another value coming up, then you get the sequence.
And we can say that's precisely how we represent it for literals. I like that.

Summary of where we are now:
* Add widely supported character set to language spec (unicode in practice
  today)
* Add universal character encoding to quoted word syntax.
  single quote, one or more hex digits, optional single quote.
* Fix lexer for arbitrary source character encodings.
* Type for literal is now list of [0-9,a-f,']
* Standard library Char@ is for widely supported character set, not
  necessarily unicode.

Some lingering issues still though.

How do we define ToUpper and ToLower, or any of the char type things? Don't we
need to assume unicode?

We should put those in separate libraries organized by locale. And maybe we
can give a 'default local' builtin choice of them.

Interesting. man 5 locale gives locale definitions to define these things. So
maybe we have a builtin that gives you access.

Is my syntax spec for universal characters legitimate? Can I parse it in
general?

So I'm lexing a word. I see a single quote, so we go inside.

I read up until the next single quote. Easy.

Now we get a single quote, there are two cases: this is the end, or this is an
escape. How do we tell the difference? Read the next character. If the next
character is not a hex digit, it's the end.

Now, we are parsing hex digits. We go until we are done with hex digits.

Now we have either:
* A non-single quote character. Continue from normal state.
* A single quote character...

The issue is how to know if we hit the end or not.

That is, I want to be able to put a universal character before a hex digit and
before the end of the word.

Okay. This isn't hard. To put it before the end of the word, require it to end
with a single quote. Examples:

  'foo'27'bar'   inside, explicit quotes on both sides.
  'foo'27there'  inside, no need for explicit quotes.
  'foo'27''      end, explicit quote required.
  'foo'27' x'    inside, 

Basically I'm saying, the single quote after a hex digit is always dropped?
But that doesn't help, because I can't do: '1'5'2'6 if we do it that way.

The 'foo'27'bar' case is telling. Is that 'b' interpreted in hex? It's not at
all obvious. I should be explicit I think. Don't implicitly drop stuff. Which
means double single quoting all the time? '1''5''2''6'. Now, I don't need to
use that for literals. I can have a special syntax there, which is: sequence
of hex single quote terminated. 1'5'2'6'.

Or... just do a list of list of hex. Make everyone's life easier.

Good. So, require single quote to terminate universal character in input, a
literal is a list of list of hex, where list has to match as per the
definition we already have, but hex type is hard coded field names 0-9a-f.

Cool. I like this. Let's sit on it a day or so to give a chance for any
concerns, and then move ahead and be done with it.

---

Meanwhile, assuming utf8, what's a good unicode character to make embedded
newline, single quote or other punctuation?

Newline: 0x0A
Single quote: 0x27
Dot: 0x2e

Take single quote, for example, encode that in unicode, have the second byte
set. So I want a 2-byte utf8 character that ends with 0x27.

There aren't any! Awesome. So nothing to worry about here? That's assuming
utf8. We could have issue with different encodings though. I'm not sure how to
test use of a different encoding.

How would I fix the implementation? Still represent things as a sequence of
bytes internally? Makes sense to me. Let's say strcmp still works for string
equality. I'll want to go via wchar_t for literals once I update those. Don't
worry about literals before then, since they are going to change soon anyway.

Which leaves everything in yylex? How about just updating ReadNextChar to skip
over an entire multibyte character? Is that doable? Not quite. It's going to
be painful I fear.

I think, maybe, I can just not worry about it for now? Mark it down as a known
potential issue, and just never do anything about it? I don't have an easy way
to test it.

Except... I could generate malformed utf8? What value is that?

Let's be honest, I'm not going to get around to fixing this anytime soon, and
I don't think it's going to be a problem any time soon. So let's not worry
about it, okay? Future me can worry about it when it becomes a problem.

---

I really wish I could avoid saying anything about unicode, or 0x27 in the
language spec.

Anyway, what would I need to make things really work in practice, not just for
my utf8 use case?

* Avoid assuming ascii compatible in lexer
 - Read character into wchar_t.
 - Store into vector as either list of wchar_t, or manually utf8 encoded.
   Some representation we can compare across wildly different source character
   encodings.
 - Error out if source file is not properly encoded in its character set.

---

I'm flipping. Here's my rationale:

In bytecode we record literals as sequences of tags, not as sequences of
characters. That's nice. The runtime doesn't have to know anything about
characters at all. It's all in terms of tags. It would be really nice to keep
it that way.

From that point of view, it seems better not to support 'structured' character
literals. Keep it as a sequence of tags. Keep everything as is from the
language point of view.

This feels right. This feels better. No need to talk about unicode. No need to
tie the language, or literals, to any particular character encoding.

Now, my original concerns still remain. We've already disposed of the
performance concern and the validity concern. Here's how I'm thinking about
the structure concern. Specific to unicode character string support, which is
sure to be the worst case scenario.

1. We can compose different subsets by breaking the literal into parts. For
example, maybe we want to mix some weird language A with some weird language
B. You could do that as, for example: Strs[A|xyz, B|wrt]. In other words,
worst case, we can do composition in use of literals. It's just a little more
tedious to do really big literals that mix a bunch of things this way.

2. We can allow escape sequences in the character literals at the user level,
like I already do with StrE. So if the goal is to generate the string without
too much pain, and there are only a few places that need special characters,
use a literal that supports a \uXXXX escape sequence.

3. If you want to bring in a bunch more text, maybe that's better as a file.
It might be nice to support file literals, but that needs a different story,
because files could be sequences of bytes rather than sequences of characters.

4. We can go with standard subsets of characters for the standard library
literals, rather than try to list all possible unicode characters.

For example:
* MES-1: 335 characters.
* WGL-4: 657 characters. Tedious, but entirely practical I think.
* ANSI C? Probably too limiting, but serves as a reasonable example.

Um... it's going to be fun to decide what subsets to make available. But worst
case, a user could define their own if it's missing.

Basic approach will be to have an fble module for a specific subset. That
defines the literal type and a function mapping literal type to unicode Char@.

What does this mean for moving forward?

1. In theory the lexer ought to support parsing of character encodings not
compatible with ascii: in other words, character encodings with multibyte
characters where some bytes in the sequence look like ascii. I already punted
that as not worth worrying about now, and presumably easy to fix later.

2. I claim we can continue to do prefix matching and not have to worry about
two different source files having different character encodings. Because we
read all of the necessary files for type checking in a single invocation of
the compiler. That means all source files are interpreted using the same
character set, whatever that is, and prefix matching ought to work.

3. No need for any spec updates. Spec is still good.

Okay? Reasonable? I feel better about this approach for sure, if we can make
it work.

---

Some time has passed. I want to try again now that I'm starting to implement
the char standard library.

Here is my dream:
* I can define separate modules for each unicode code page. The module defines
  the mapping from source words to Char@ and implements char classification
  for the characters in that mapping.
* There is a way for me to compose multiple of these modules together into a
  new module that supports all the characters in each component.
* It's important that users have the option to only include those specific
  modules they want, in case their source character set doesn't support all
  the modules.

I feel like technically that shouldn't be too hard, if I can figure out the
right way to express things in fble.

Conceptually we have:
* A mapping from (sub)words to runtime letter type. Sample letter types: Ascii@,
  Char@, Digit@.
* A way to turn a full word into a sequence of letters.
* A way to turn a sequence of letters into a target type. e.g. convert a list
  of Char@ to a String@, or a list of Digit@ to an Int@.

The first two need language help, because words are not first class in fble. I
want full words to be interpreted at compile time, because that's where we
know the source character set and it feels bad performance wise to have to
parse words at runtime.

My requirement for use is that I should be able to specify a single named
entity (e.g. Int, Str) that can go from a word to the target type. It's too
much overhead syntax wise if we have to split it like Int(Chars|...);

That is, I need:
   
  Int@ x = Int|42;

I'm not happy with:

  Int@ x = Int(Digits|42);

Though maybe I should be, considering how much 'Int|42' costs at runtime. At
least the extra function call makes that more clear.

Either way, whatever you apply the word to, the compiler needs to know how to
parse the word into pieces. The only thing the compiler knows at a compile
time is the type of the entity. So we have to encode the set of words in the
entity type.

Maybe we have a special literal type. Let's start by thinking of Digits as
going from 'word' to List@<Digit@>, and not worry about the rest of the
transformation. We could say Digits is a literal and define it specially:

  @| Digits = |(0: zero, 1: one, 2: two, ...);

We can infer from the types of zero, one, two, what letter type is associated
with Digits, as well as the set of words.

What can we do with Digits?
* Apply it to a word: Digits|'13451'. It gives us a list.

If we have this form, then we could also compose two literals together.

  @| Alnum = |+(Digits, Alpha);

I wish we specified the letter type somewhere in the syntax. But anyway,
straight forward. Define how to do the union in case of conflict.

Can we pass a literal to a function? Well, we can't apply or combine it unless
we know the type of the literal. The type encodes the sequence and letter
type, but not necessarily the mapping to specific letter values.

How about we use a struct type to identify the literal type? Require all
fields to have the same type. The field names are the words. The struct value
is the mapping.

  % Digits = @(0: one, 1: two, ...);
  @ Digits@ = @<Digits>;

Maybe we can use 'Digits' to generate the sequence of characters.

  Digits|100234;

Then what I'm looking for is an operator that takes two struct types and
unions them together. Straight forward enough. But also at the value level.

  % Alnum = @+(Digits, Alpha);
  % Hex = @+(Decimal, @(a: 10, b: 11, c: 12, d: 13, e: 14, F: 15));

Or, could we use composition? A struct where each field is a literal gives us
back something we could use as a literal? Sounds tricky if we don't know the
letter type and have to infer it based on the structure of the struct value.
And harder at runtime to keep the structure.

Anyway, some open question there. But we still have the last hurdle, which is
how to go from:
 
  Int@ x = Int(Digits|100234);

To:

  Int@ x = Int|100234;

We could do it if Int had more structure: a literal + a function. In other
words, a special kind of struct value with certain named fields.

  *(letters: *(L@ a, L@ b, ...), for: (T@ t, L@ l) { ... });

Now we can infer the letter type and the target type from the 'for' function,
so maybe we can do fancy composition to figure out the letter values?

---

Proposal:
* Keep the current approach for literals as the basis: an enum type.
* Allow composition via standard union composition:
  +(Letters@ letters, Digits@ digits);
* Encode the structure of a literal in a custom way in FbleLiteralInstr.
  For example, a sequence of tags where some tags can be marked as 'nested'.
  If the tag is nested, the next tag is the tagwidth and you plug that inside
  whatever comes after it in the sequence. For example, for a top level union
  with 7 fields: 5*, 6, 3, 4, 5. Is interpreted as:
    7@(3: 6@(5: @())), 7@(4: @()), 7@(5: @())

I claim this solves all my language requirement problems. Given two arbitrary
charsets A@ and B@, with functions A from A@ to Char@ and B from B@ to Char@,
we can easily and automatically compose them into a charset C@ and derive the
function C from C@ to Char@:

  @ C@ = +(A@ a, B@ b);

  (C@) { Char@; } C = (C@ c) { c.?(a: A(c.a), b: B(c.b)); }

I could easily create a module that automatically defines a string literal
function for any combination of character sets you provide.

The big insight I have now that I didn't before is that I can encode the
structure of individual letters in the literal instruction in a custom way
that still lets us represent literal contents as a compact sequence of bytes
without making assumptions about character set or having to know the character
set to interpret the literals at runtime.

There is some question about how to handle ambiguity in composed literals. I
could allow it or not. Or allow it unless we encounter it. Those are details
that I don't think matter too much.

I want to continue to match a prefix of a word, to avoid any assumptions
internally about the character set other than that it is prefix coded. But
maybe there's no need to allow ambiguity at all in the literal spec. For
example, don't allow 'a' and 'ab' to both be words, because it violates prefix
coding. Then we don't need to check for the longest match. I'm not sure. It's
a detail that doesn't really matter right now.

Let's try it and see how far I can get. Start with ironing out implementation
details. Then update the spec. I can write a simple spec test case to test it
out.

Maybe easiest is to start with the LITERAL encoding in the instruction. I
think everyone today uses FbleNewLiteralValue? Yes. Good.

Union needs a size_t tagwidth and size_t tag. Maybe change size_t* args to
size_t* spec?

I'm tempted to optimize for the case where things are flat, but that doesn't
seem worth doing if the main literal we have is going to be nested anyway.

Idea is:
* start with tail of the list and unit.
* the data tells us:
  list of (tagwidth, letter) to produce the value.
  prepend the value to the list.

All the final things should have the same tag width.
Maybe we could encode the tag widths separately to avoid duplication?

There are lots of ways I could try to encode things. Best to start with the
simplest. Make it like a mini program. Assuming you start with value as unit
and tail as empty, the instructions are:
A. Wrap value in union of tagwidth, tag.
B. Prepend value to list.

It will be convenient to represent as a sequence, so sequence of size_t. The
top level type has a common tag width. How about make things simple:

  -1 for tagwidth means prepend value to list and reset value to unit.
  Otherwise wrap the existing value in a union of tagwidth, tag.

Easy. Let's try it.

Do we want to reverse the list for easy construction? Say you consume from the
back of the list? I think so. Read the list in reverse.

---

If I want something more packed, figure out some way to interpret the literal
program as a sequence of bits. Then we can say:
* bit 0: prepend value to the list.
* bit 1, followed by 6 bit tag width, followed by <tagwidth> bits of tag:
  Wrap the current value in a new union value with given tag width and tag.

But worry about that later. First step is the simplest form described above.

The special case for the simple form above for flat literals:

For tagwidth W and tagsequence a, b, c, d:

-1, a, W, -1, b, W, -1, c, W, -1, d, W

For each letter: -1, <tag>, W

Easy.

---

Now to add support for composite literals in the type checker. This is
slightly involved, because of a number of different things to worry about.

I have:
* An element data type. Initially normalized union type, but maybe we don't
  need to do that proactively.
* The unit type, to test for equality. Maybe better to have an FbleIsUnitType
  function to avoid the need to allocate a unit type?
* A location in the literal word that I am tracking for error message purposes.
* I was keeping track of max field length, but I don't think I need to support
  that anymore? I'm not sure I ever needed that?
* Tracking the current position in the word to read from.
* If we don't find a match, we give an error message pointing to where we
  failed to match.
* And now, for the new thing, I'll need to produce a program to construct the
  letter value.
* And I'll also need to worry about recursion.

What API would be good for dealing with all these different moving pieces?

Pseudocode for my function to traverse the element type to check for a match:

  Inputs:
  - a normalized union data type to search in.
  - the word to match against.

  for each field in the union data type:
   - if the field type is unit, check for letter match against the word.
     If found, return the field's tag and number of characters matched?

   - if the field type is a union, do a recursive call.
     If found, return the sequence of field tags and number of chars matched.

   - otherwise: report an error or ignore invalid fields to check.

  if no matches, return match length of 0.

At the top level, we append the sequence of fields to the program, advance the
location and the word. Makes sense to me. So this API is matching a single
prefix and telling you the length of the match found if any.

It would be really nice if there were no error conditions from this function.
It's not great to use ease of implementation as a guide for forming the
language specification, but if I were to in this case, I would say: find the
first valid match, ignore any fields of inappropriate type.

Alternatively, and probably more generally, allow the function to return
errors. Then we could change it to detect duplicate match and disallow
unexpected field types. That's probably the better route to go.

Either way, inputs are clear:
* Normalized union data type.
* Word to check for.
* Location for error reporting.

Outputs are clear:
* Length of match found.
* Sequence of (tagwidth, tag) to produce the matching letter.
* Or an error status which means we already output an error.

For our current literal program, what order do we want to append the
(tagwidth, tag) values?

Say I want: 6@(3: 2@(1: @()));

We are reading from the back of the program. Starting with unit. So, when
reading from the back, I want to see: (2, 1), (6, 3), -1. Which means when
producing from the front, I want to write: -1, (6, 3), (2, 1).

How about we instead return in reverse order, inside out from this function:
(2, 1), (6, 3). Then reverse it when pushing into the program? Does that help
at all? That way, if a match is found in the child, I can append my (tagwidth,
tag) to populate up. Alternatively would be speculatively push to the back of
the program. The downside of speculatively pushing is lots of unnecessary
reallocations unless I'm willing to track capacity and size separate.

Better to return to a separate data structure rather than go directly to the
program. That way callers can do what they want. Anyway, that's a performance
thing I can worry about later.

Proposed outputs API:
* Given an vector of size_t (or pair of size_t?) to output sequence to, inside
  out order.
* Return ssize_t to return length of match (including 0 for no match), or -1
  to indicate error.

Another option would be change how we interpret the program to be inside out
order? But I feel like better to make something more natural for runtime and
less natural for compile time.

---

On whether we should pick 'first' match or 'longest' match in case of
ambiguity:
* It's easy to change the spec and the implementation.
* I have one test case for this case, which would also be easy to update.

The question is, is there any legitimate reason I would want to allow
ambiguity in literals, and in that case, that I would prefer a longer match to
a shorter match? Like, honestly. Not some weird "ooh, maybe we could do this
then" kind of thing. Like what we really want.

We are matching a prefix at a time rather than a letter at a time so I don't
have to build into the language or the compiler what the notion of a letter
is. In other words, I can treat the input as a sequence of bytes instead of a
sequence of characters and match a prefix there, assuming characters are
encoding with a prefix code. Otherwise I have to start to worry about locales
and such. In other words, a word is a sequence of characters encoded into a
sequence of bytes. If I'm willing to compare sequences of bytes and limit to
prefix encodings of characters, I don't have to know what the character
encoding is as long we are consistent in reading the field names and the
literal words in the same encoding.

Honestly, requiring it to be a prefix code makes sense to me. It doesn't make
sense to have things be ambiguous. It's just confusing.

The only legitimate reason to allow ambiguity would be if it facilitates
composition. Like, maybe it's infeasible to prevent ambiguity to show up in
some cases, because you are combining two different types that happen to have
some ambiguity. I can kind of imagine such a case. You have two big character
sets, you want to take the union, there is some overlap. How do I deal with
that?

As a user, I would like some way to control the overlap. If we say 'first'
match, then we can get into impossible situations where we want some to prefer
from one set and some to prefer from another. The same thing with longest
match, to be honest.

I feel like you should avoid ambiguity, but if you can't easily for some
reason, you should be prepared to handle any choice. And to make things more
consistent, we should just do field order rather than make things completely
undefined.

It's fine for an exact match case "a" vs "a". There's no way to specify as
part of the literal word which you would prefer. It's less obvious for "a" vs
"ab". Maybe if we match "a", we can't match "b". On the other hand, you could
say the same otherwise. Tricky.

---

Back to the composite literal typecheck api.

It would be great to put it into type.c, so we can reuse TypeList and dealing
with recursion and all that. If I do that, though, I don't want any type
checking or error reporting. Nice, because we don't need a location for error
reporting. But means if we want to make things more strict later on, it's
awkward.

I need to be able to convey error cases though. If the letter doesn't have the
right type, if nothing else. Unless that's allowed? No, we can't have a
matching letter have the wrong type. Let's keep it all in typecheck.c for now
then. Duplicate TypeList. It's easy enough.

Try again with:  6@(3: 2@(1: @()));

The literal program for this is: -1, 3, 6, 1, 2

I want to output in reverse: 2, 1, 6, 3.

---

Hmm... My implementation isn't reporting any errors. When should we report
errors and when not?

Potential errors:
* If the provided letter type isn't a union type.
* If the provided letter type has a non-union field type?
* If there are multiple matches.
* If the matched field isn't a unit type.

Consider the last one: if the matched field isn't a unit type. But is it
allowed to be a union type that we search in for sub letters? It certainly
ought to be. So we shouldn't error in that case if it is and we don't find a
match there.

We've already discussed multiple matches case, though I don't have a
definitive answer at the moment.

Honestly, it sort of makes sense to me to say we are searching whatever type
you give us. You could give us any random thing, we will only successfully
find a letter if it is of union type.

Probably the most important thing here is to help the user. Hmm... the spec is
complicated enough now. I'm also too deep into things to know what would or
would not be helpful to a user.

For now, let's be a bit generous and allow anything? So you could, for
example, do f|'' for a function f that takes a list of any kind of thing to
get the empty list.

If we accidentally have a unit field in a letter type we don't intend to be a
letter, that could be bad. Seems like it would be good to discourage that kind
of mistake? I don't know how we could though.

---

Okay, the spec is updated. We have spec tests in place and an implementation.
It's well defined. The general description isn't too bad, though it really
needs some preliminary explanation. What I have currently:

   In general a matching letter can be found in a union type if it is either a
   field of type *() whose name matches a prefix of the rest of the literal
   word, or a field of union type where a matching letter can be found. Fields
   are traversed in order with the first match returned.

Let's proceed with this for now and see how it goes.

---

Thinking about how to optimize the literal program brings up thoughts that
maybe there's a better way to do literals.

The goals:
* Make literals more compact in code to save space.
 - By using a more efficient encoding.
* Reduce the time it takes to create a literal value.
 - By using a more efficient encoding and hope the caches give you better
   performance, or by pre-allocated the literal value in code (but then you
   lose space savings probably).

The most compact way to encode literal values would be to define a tree
describing the bit widths of the type, followed by a raw list of bits for the
literal. That tree could be shared across multiple literals.

But if it's shared, why don't we make the programmer share it? Why not have
that tree be the literal object?

I'm sure I've gone through all this before, but it can't hurt to think through
it all again.

Options are:
1. Don't do any validation of a literal at compile time.
You can write anything you want. Runtime has to check somehow that the literal
is valid.
2. Do validation at compile time, but that means the compiler has to know at
the site of the literal word how to decode the string.

The minimum the compiler needs to validate a literal string is a list of
words. We know that we want this list of words to be composable: I can
describe a list of words as the combination of two different lists of words.

What we don't necessarily need to make things work is to let the compiler know
the mapping from words to values.

How nice would it be if I could get rid of Ascii@ and IntLit@ types, for
example? I guess it would turn into Ascii@ and IntLit@ literal types instead
though. Unless we are okay getting rid of validation of a literal at compile
time.

If we had proper support for error handling in the language, maybe it would
make sense to skip validation of literals at compile time.

If I were to re-envision literals, how would it look? Something like:
* We provide a struct value which maps field names to element values.
* The type of the struct value determines what valid field names are.
* We leverage composition of struct values for composition of literals.
* Given a struct value and a literal, and maybe a target type? We return a
  list (or stream) of values of that target type.

In practice I don't think it changes anything substantial for the user. You
get rid of types Ascii@ and IntLit@, and replace them with types @<Ascii> and
@<IntLit>. If the values are passed via struct value, that means ... really
nothing beneficial in terms of implementation. We still have sequences of
tags. It would just rule out the possibility of statically allocating the
literal value in code.

---

Anyway, back to how to have a more compact representation of literal program.

If we just want to make the program more compact:

Separate the program into 'type' and 'data' bits.

The type is a tree node with:
* tag width
* [(tag value, tree)] for each sub type

The data is just a sequence of raw tag bits.

To run the program, traverse the tree from the root:
* Read raw bits of tag based on tag width.
* If tag is in list of children, recursively read element value from subtree
* Else wrap unit in the tag read and return the value.
* From the top level: add the value to the list of elements.

The data bits can be packed as densely as we want. The only question is how to
represent the type trees compactly.

Maybe as a sequence of byte encoded integer values?
* tag width can be represented in a single byte, because bit width is limited
  to 64 bits in practice.
* tag value is likely very small, but potential up to 64 bytes. Have it be
  byte encoded variable width integer.
* we probably don't want to parse each subtree any time we are looking for a
  tag match, so reference the subtree using an offset in bytes relative to the
  parent tree.
* If we want to avoid parsing the subtree each time, we can separate out its
  list from the list of tag values that have subtrees. Assuming having a
  subtree is pretty rare. Or don't worry about that.
* Tag values could be represented as delta from previous tag value to
  potentially reduce space. Though honestly I doubt that's needed at all,
  because we are very unlikely to have a tag value greater than 127 in this
  list.

Okay? I have a concrete proposal for the new program format. In practice, what
I expect for Int| is:
* 0x1(Sep@) 0x0(.t) 0x4(Dec@) 0x2(end of list)
* 0x2(Dec@) 0x0(.oct) 0x8(Oct@) 0x3(end of list)
* 0x3(Oct@) 0x8(end of list)
* <data>
  
It's a 10 byte header. I had forgotten how much structure we use in Dec@.
Note:
* I'm using tree relative to the start of the header instead of the current
  node. Better in case we can share subtrees and don't want to have to put
  negative values.

For Str| is:
* 0x7(Ascii@) 97(end of list)
* <data>

It's a 2 byte header.

I guess we need to list where the data is relative to the header too. So add a
couple extra bytes for that.

Anyway, this is a bit complex and definitely pretty arbitrary. First step
should be to get the encoder and decoder in the same abstraction boundary and
then keep the abstraction internal. The natural encoder is in typecheck.c.
Except that's pretty heavy, so maybe I can put it in a separate literal.c?
Except, then we need to have a way to talk to literal.c.

The other approach is to store the literal as an FbleValue* that can be
returned directly without any extra processing. For that to work, I want the
FbleValue* to be movable in memory without changing the contents of it. That
would mean creating an FbleValue* without absolute pointers, but rather
everything relative. We have three kinds of FbleValue* right now:
1. packed - if the literal fits packed, that's fine. We can totally use that.
2. Stack allocated - I could pretend it's allocated on the root stack, right?

Hey, this is interesting. How come I GcRealloc values that are pass to and
then returned from subframes? Is that working as expected?

3. GC allocated - I could pretend its from a root generation. A bit more
overhead this way than if we used a StackAllocated value.

4. StaticAllocated - introduce a new type of static allocated values? I bet
that would work fine honestly. No overhead.

Either way, we need to update FbleValue to allow relative pointers:
* struct fields list
* union arg value
* function statics list

Would this let me do a more compact representation? Can we have compact
pointers? Sounds risky. In general a GC value can refer to a stack value? A
stack value can refer to a GC value. And we expect those to be potentially
allocated far apart on the heap, so not much value of putting them close
together. But we could leverage least significant bits in pointers if we
wanted to allow relative and absolute? Or just make everything relative and do
some math.

---

Here's my vote:
1. Try to factor out code for writing and reading literal programs.
 - So that it's easy to change the encoding later as we like.
2. Compress the existing encoding by:
 - Using a single byte for tag width + continuation bit.
 - Using only as many bytes as needed for tag value.
3. Measure performance impact of the change in encoding.
 If none, that's fine. We still get like 12x encoding compression.
4. Save everything else for a later release.

How to factor things out into a literal.c file:
* FbleNewLiteralValue can easily move to literal.c as is.
* For producing the literal program...

Ideally I give the element type, the word, and an output vector of bytes that
generates the program vector. Ideally we return a boolean whether we passed or
not. And we advance location as we go so it knows where the error occurred and
can report the error.

It's awkward getting the error message out of it. If it weren't for that, it
would be much nicer. Maybe you pass a pointer to the word and the location. We
update that pointer and location as we go. You can read it out when you are
done. Fair? Fair.

Or... return a proper error indicator instead of using out parameters?

Or, just print the error message and return false?

  bool FbleParseLiteral(FbleTypeHeap* th, FbleType* type,
         const char* word, FbleLoc loc, FbleBytesV* program)

---

While I ponder that, crazy different ideas:

Let's say we have a literal type specifically that we can pass around. Every
literal shares the same set of letters. To give better validation, the type
describes the set of letters or literal words that are legal. Maybe using
regex or glob, or something else.

That way we can validate the literal at use. We can pass the 'literal value'
to something less restrictive.

Well, if I don't want to worry about character encoding, I need some way to
align between where we specify the literal word and where we consume it.

Let's say we have a literal type which is a list of letters. We provide a way
to compose two lists together: append. Now we can identify letters based on
the position in the list.

What does this give me? I could convert any struct type to a list, using the
approach we know how. Using what we use today. I guess the difference is
instead of constructing a value, I provide a case select to get an individual
letter.

Doesn't seem worth changing the language spec for literals at this point. This
kind of thing is pretty cool in my opinion:

  # Converts decimal to Int@.
  (Dec@) { Int@; } FromDec = (Dec@ x) {
    x.?(oct: FromOct(x.oct), '8': 8, '9': 9);
  };

---

Back to how to move code for literal programs into literal.c.

The high level interface I want for FbleParseLiteral is:
* Inputs:
 - The element type.
 - The word to parse.
 - The location of the word to parse (for error reporting)
* Output on success:
 - The size of the literal program.
 - A dynamically allocated array of bytes of the literal program.
* Output on failure:
 - The location of the error.
 - The position in word of the error.

It's just awkward to do this in C.

Another option though, could be to skip passing and tracking the location.
Just pass the position in the word of the error. It can even be an int offset.
Then the caller can deal with location tracking. Hmm... That might be easier.

We can say we return a vector of bytes. But on failure, we set the size of the
vector as the position in the word where the error was encountered and the
byte contents to NULL. That's a simpler interface, right?

FbleLiteralProgram is FbleByteV.

Cool. Let's try that.

Trouble: FbleNewLiteralValue is public API. It needs to be for generated code
to make use of it.

Which makes the choice of the representation that much more important.

Conceptually the process is:
* typecheck.c parses the literal into a program, stores it in tc.
* The program gets passed through as is to code.
* Backends express the program as appropriate:
 - interpret passes directly to FbleNewLiteralValue.
 - C creates a static size_t.
 - aarch64 creates an array of size_t.
* At runtime, the data for the program is passed to FbleNewLiteralValue.

So this is very much an exposed to public API kind of thing.

A minor question: why does FbleNewLiteralValue need to know the length? In
practice it's because we read from the back, but we could write the program in
the right order to start with to avoid that problem.

Otherwise, I want to treat the literal program as a raw sequence of bytes. I
want that to be what's known publicly about it. And then let it be cast to
whatever the real type is internally, no? If we need to know the size, we can
encode it in the raw bytes themselves maybe?

What the backends need to be able to do is read it as a raw sequence of bytes
and know the length (to know how many of the bytes to read).

Once I have it as a raw sequence of bytes, we can change the internal
representation easily. But not until then.

For some reason this feels like a weird thing to do: have an abstract data
type, but expose it as raw bytes so we can pass it around.

Sounds a little like a proto? Would it make sense to use proto format to store
this? Would that change anything?

No. I think it's reasonable to say a literal program is size_t length plus
uint8_t* data. Then the API proposal is:

  FbleLiteralProgram: {
    size_t length;
    uint8_t* data;
  }

FbleNewLiteralValue can take length and data directly. Users should access
length and data directly. Easy.

Okay? Here's my proposal:
1. Factor out the literal API the way I want:
  fble-literal.h, FbleLiteralProgram, FbleNewLiteralValue are both public.
  literal.h: FbleParseLiteral is internal.
  Stay with size_t for now. No change to encoding.
2. Switch to uint8_t for data.
  We should be able to keep the size_t based encoding, just cast it to
  uint8_t. That will test how generic the API is.
3. Change to whatever internal crazy encoding I want.

Good. Sounds like a plan. And worth doing to get a more generic public API for
literals.

I suppose for disassembly of code, we could just not print the literal value,
print the raw contents, or add internal API to decode and print out the tag
values we are working with.

---

Question about alignment. If we want to be able to cast to things that are
bigger than byte width, we need the data to be aligned. That has to be part of
the spec, because we are saying you can copy around the data.

Alignment for interpreter and aarch64 is fine. I'm just not sure how to
control alignment for the C backend. Any guarantees from the language?

In practice when I try it, I'm getting 8 byte alignment. That's good.

I can't tell from the C spec or the internet. But at least gcc is generating
explicit 8 byte alignment for arrays, so maybe it's a thing. At least I can
rely on it in practice for now. Worst case we can work around it by relying on
the fact that structs are supposed to be aligned to their largest member.
Probably, to be safe, I should say these are pointer aligned data structures.
Or be vague, and say it should be suitably aligned like malloc would for any
type that could fit in that size.

Okay? Let's try it.

---

The abstraction boundaries feel pretty good. It's a pretty clean separation
this way.

It's interesting, the switch from size_t to uint8_t for the type causes us to
run out of memory when compiling the generated c code for the super long
literal test case. Let me not worry about that now, because we'll make the
literal more compact soon.

Now that I have the new abstraction boundary, what do we want to do here?

How about:
1. Measure memory use and runtime associated with literals in fble benchmark.
2. Update to my new compact scheme.
3. Measure memory use and runtime associated with literals again.

See how much memory and performance we save. Then call it a day. Worry about
super optimizing things another time.

FbleNewLiteralValue is:
  0.070% 738 [5]FbleNewLiteralValue

So we're not going to see a difference in benchmark time.

Mostly from:

   58.026% 430 [6]/Games/BenchmarkGame/FannkuchRedux%.Flip
   11.051% 85  [7]/Games/BenchmarkGame/FannkuchRedux%.Flips
   7.045%  55  [8]/Std/Int/Show%.Digit
   3.011%  23  [9]/Games/TicTacToe/AI%.SquareData
   2.098%  22  [10]/Invaders/Graphics%.String
   2.016%  16  [11]/Fbld/Parse/M%.EndOfInput
   2.016%  16  [12]/Fbld/Parse/M%.String
   2.3%    15  [13]/Fbld/Parse/Block%.BlankLine
   1.021%  9   [14]/Fbld/Parse/M%.GetL
   1.8%    8   [15]/Graphics/Triangle%.Clipped

And that would be easy to get rid of by factoring out the literals. Oh well.
Can't harm to make them smaller anyway. This also means its fine to slow
things down slightly.

In terms of space... how do we get that? With some printf fun.

For fble-benchmark:
* Largest literal is 323520 bytes
* Total bytes for literal data is: 677240 bytes

Now we have all that info, let's optimize.

Remember how my new approach is going to go:
* Byte oriented.
* Assume tag widths are 6 bits or less.
* There is no empty literal element: we always have some tag.
* Pack tag width and 'is last' bit into a single byte.
* Pack tag value into a sequence of bytes with 7 bits data, 1 bit
  continuation.
* What order do I want the data to be listed in?

The ideal data order for consumption would be:
* Last element first.
* Tag width before tag value.

Can I easily compute it that way? It's probably not so hard. Sure. Worst case
I build up the initial data in reverse order and reverse it at the end. I
could use recursion to go all the way to the last element first and populate
the output that way. Let's do that.

Experience:
* Consuming the data is clean and straight forward in this format.
* Producing the data isn't too bad using recursion and not worrying about
  stack size. If I have to switch to iteration, I should be able to populate
  the data in reverse order and reverse the whole thing at the end easily
  enough.
* I probably need to add some crazy tests to get code coverage for larger size
  tags. Maybe try a 9 bit tag and hope that's enough? 257 possible field
  values?

Time to debug. What program do I expect for simple 'BAC'?

Read order should be:

[C, A, B]

Tag widths are all 2. Values are 2, 0, 1. We don't ever have a subfield, so
expect last bit to be set in all cases. Thus I would expect raw bytes:

  size 6:
  0x4; {0x2 tag width, 0 last}
  0x2; 0x2 tag value

  0x4; {0x2 tag width, 0 last}
  0x0; 0x0 tag value

  0x4; {0x2 tag width, 0 last}
  0x1; 0x1 tag value

Okay. Bunch of minor bugs found. I've decided to flip the polarity of the
continuation bit, because most of my bugs were about interpreting it the other
way around.

Let's see how things work now.

Well, not sure what you expected, but super long literal smashes the stack
this way. Sadness.

Maybe let's test everything else, check it in, then switch to iterative
approach.

For fble-benchmark:
* Largest literal is: 323520 ==> 26960 bytes
* Total bytes for literal data is: 677240 ==> 62448 bytes

So about 11x reduction in size taken by literals. That's decent.

If I wanted, I maybe could get another 2x reduction, but honestly I don't
think it's worth it. We're in good enough shape now.

   0.072% 778 [5]FbleNewLiteralValue

                                    Incoming

   61.095% 482 [6]/Games/BenchmarkGame/FannkuchRedux%.Flip
   12.021% 95  [7]/Games/BenchmarkGame/FannkuchRedux%.Flips
   6.094%  54  [8]/Std/Int/Show%.Digit
   2.018%  17  [9]/Games/TicTacToe/AI%.SquareData
   1.092%  15  [10]/Fbld/Parse/M%.EndOfInput
   1.079%  14  [11]/Fbld/Parse/Block%.BlankLine
   1.079%  14  [12]/Fbld/Parse/M%.String
   1.079%  14  [13]/Invaders/Graphics%.String
   1.067%  13  [14]/Invaders/Game%.DrawScore
   1.054%  12  [15]/Graphics/Triangle%.Clipped

Maybe it's a little more expensive. Or maybe it's just noise.
