
* fble-pprof 'unable to serve' after ctrl-c to quit just before.

Internet says it could be one of two things:
1. Improper shutdown of the socket. Because I did ctrl-c to quit.
2. Socket is in TIMED_WAIT state.
  Run ss -ti "sport = :8123" to check.

Possible Fixes:
* Bind with SO_REUSEADDR
* Catch ctrl-c and clean things up properly in that case.

Questions: if I closed the socket properly, would I still run into the timed
wait issue?

ss isn't showing me anything.

Use this instead:

  ss -ati "sport = :8123"

While running, I see:

State     Recv-Q Send-Q Local Address:Port  Peer Address:Port
LISTEN    0      10         127.0.0.1:8123       0.0.0.0:*
         cubic cwnd:10
TIME-WAIT 0      0          127.0.0.1:8123     127.0.0.1:55718

After killing:

State       Recv-Q   Send-Q       Local Address:Port       Peer Address:Port
TIME-WAIT   0        0                127.0.0.1:8123          127.0.0.1:55718

How long it takes to recover seems to change a bunch. Maybe depending on the
application that it is bound to?

With multiple requests, looks like these things queue up, and they take a
while to drain.

To see the timed wait timeout:

  cat /proc/sys/net/ipv4/tcp_fin_timeout

In my case it's 60. Presumably 60 seconds.

It would still be nice to confirm that I have the same problem when properly
closing the socket. Then I have to decide what I want to do here.

Tcl provides a reuseaddr option. Windows adds like an exclusive addr option on
top of it. I guess the flag is a potential security issue because you can try
to steal traffic or otherwise mess up a server without any recourse on the
server's part.

For the pprof application specifically, it's probably fine. But also, it's
probably fine for the pprof server to pick a random free port instead of hard
coding a port. The only reason to hard code is to make it easier to use
history completion to connect to it.

Playing around with things, it looks like we shouldn't have an issue if all
the clients have disconnected before trying to restart. Let me confirm.

I'm not sure. Even if I end elinks, I'm seeing the TIMED_WAIT state last. But
I don't with network client and echo apps. Maybe elinks isn't closing the
connection cleanly?

I don't know. It feels pretty random.

What if I use a random port by default, instead of 8123? Does my api even
support that? If I use port 0 maybe?

I can use port 0, which is fine, except the application doesn't know which
port it actually gets. That's another api issue.

I'm thinking the following:
* Decide if you should be allowed to pass 0 as a port to the fble network
  library.
 - If yes: provide a way to get the actual port value used. If no, fail in
   case the user passes 0.
* Don't add a reuse addr option to fble. It just feels risky. Let the user
  work around it as they want.
* Optionally change the default port for fble pprof to port 0 to make it more
  obvious it's the responsibility of the user to deal with conflicting ports
  if they want to use a specific one.
* Decide if this is something I want to deal with this release, or wait until
  I standardize networking.

