Shared Libraries
---

* Any way to avoid exporting internally shared symbols in libfble.a?

In theory: 
* -fvisibility=hidden to make things invisible
* __attribute__((visibility("default"))) on functions to make them visible.

But it's only for shared libraries?

Clearly my .o files need to export the internal functions I want to share. So
I have this collection of .o files.

To turn those .o files into a library, I'm using:
* ar rcs $lib $objs 

In this case, I don't think it makes sense. We aren't linking at the time we
make the library if it's a static library. It's just a pile of object files.
Since we aren't linking, there's no way to say: link the internal functions
now.

Can I do that? Can I do some libfoo.a to libfoo.a transformation that invokes
the linker, links up or inlines whatever we can internally, and only exports
an explicit list of symbols?

There is a '-r' flag to the linker to do incremental linking. But I think the
output from the linker is either an executable or a shared library. In either
case we could presumably use options to hide internal signals. But if we are
distributing libfoo.a, I don't think there's anything we can do to hide
internally shared functions aside from trying to mangle the names better.

Okay, so here are my options as I see it:
* If I want to do things as a static library, I must not include the internally
  shared functions in any of the .o files from the library. Then where do they
  live? They need to be inlined wherever they are used. So define them in .h
  file as static and live with the fact that the code for them is duplicated.
* Or produce a shared library, where there are ways for me to control the
  dynamic export list explicitly.

Should I distribute libfble as a shared library rather than a static library?
Probably yes. It's reused in a bunch of different executables: fble-cli,
fble-compile, fble-bin, fble-app, fble-md5, and on and on.

So let's not worry about the static library case. I want, long term, to
distribute code using shared libraries.

And once I do that, there are ways in theory to control what symbols are
exported. And then I can mark symbols as exported or not exported. Practically
speaking this means defining a macro, or maybe a couple of macros to say which
is which.

Probably makes sense to have an explicit macro for things that are part of the
public API. Or... I already have the list of symbols used for documentation
purposes. Figure out how to pass that list explicitly at link time to only
export those symbols.

Is it worth doing this now, as part of this release? I already have a lot of
the infrastructure in place for switching to shared libraries. How about
making it the default on all platforms?

Maybe let's try it, see what the issues are, and then decide how I want to
proceed.

I remember doing this before. Maybe I can find my notes and figure out why I
decided to hold off on switching over to shared libraries.

thoughts/fble-0.4/modular_compilation.txt has some notes, but I don't see
clearly where I abandoned shared libraries. I should keep looking.

thoughts/fble-0.4/foreign_function_interface.txt is the rest of the
discussion.

Sounds like what stopped me was I didn't know a good way to handle the search
path for windows: current directory, executable directory, system directory.
To be able to support running tools both from pre install and post install
directory. And seeing that libSDL was distributed as a static library on
windows. And knowing that, at the time, switching to shared libraries didn't
really add anything.

The last point has changed now, so it's worth revisiting.

Is all this worth it just to hide some internal functions? Probably not. But
it might be worth it for significant reductions in code size, using more
standard approach for distributing the code on linux, and as a step forward
for supporting dynamic loading of compiled code (think FFI) from the
interpreter.

Let's think about how things should work in terms of installs and stuff to get
the library in the right place for things.

---

Don't overthink things. Don't do anything weird. Look at my existing
platforms, aim to produce libraries in a consistent manner as my existing
platforms.

On linux, that means:
* Looks like a mix of libraries installed as just .so, or just .a, or both .so
  and .a. So not much guidance there.
* For .so files, looks like NEEDED is a plain file: libfoo.so, and RUNPATH is
  unused.

So, conceptually:
* libfble.so installed in standard system library path.
* need some magic or something for testing the executables locally before they
  are installed.
* libfble-foo.so installed in a standard system library path, or opened
  explicitly with dlopen.

I can't quite tell what's happening on msys in Windows. Looks like:
* Plenty of static libraries shipped in /usr/lib equivalent.
* Dlls live in /usr/bin.

It seems like there's a tradeoff for using a static vs shared library:
* sharing means you can reuse code used in multiple places, but you have all
  the code that might ever be used sitting around even if it's never used.
* static means you use only the code you need, but you end up duplicating
  anything that is needed multiple places.

So, if you have the bulk of the library used in the bulk of applications, it
makes more sense to do it as a shared library. If you have small, different
parts of the library used in all different applications, it makes more sense
to do as a static library.

In my case, let's think about the different libraries:
* libfble - bulk of it used in bulk of applications I would say.
 - runtime is shared by anyone who runs things
 - compiler is shared by anyone who compiles things
 - lots of things do both.
* libfble-foo - if it's mostly compiled fble code, we might expect a bunch of
  it to be shared, but also a bunch of it not to be used by most applications,
  depending on what files from the library they import. I would say it's hard
  to say much generically.

No. This isn't worth doing at this point in the release. Certainly not if the
only goal is to prevent external access to internally shared functions. Let me
put off the question of static versus shared libraries until I have a more
compelling reason to switch, like support for dynamic code loading.
