Stdlib Iter
===========
Do we use iterators at all in practice? It feels like old stuff to me.

Current uses:
* Invaders uses it to iterate through a range of integers.
* Drawing Triangles does the same. And rectangles.
* Similar with Sat.

So basically right now, it's only used for integer ranges of things. Maybe we
want to add part of Int@ library for this instead of having a generic integer
type.

No point having iterators for list, you can use ForEach to iterate over the
list.

How about for things like Maps or Sets?

Honestly I feel like each specific kind of thing can implement its own For
and similar traversal functions. I don't see a real benefit to have a unified
generic interface for iteration.

Iterators are useful for traversing an unmaterialized data structure. If we
have a list, a map, or a set, it's already materialized. Just iterate over
that. It's only things like integer ranges where we generate things on the
fly. Or, eventually, input streams.

I suppose an input stream is an abstract iteration. Maybe we can reuse the
same type and infrastructure for both integer iteration and IO iteration. The
important part in both these cases is we want to be able to look at and act
upon earlier elements in the iteration before bringing into memory any
subsequent elements. Or, also, throwing away earlier elements before looking
at subsequent elements. Otherwise you could say 'Range' function produces a
list of integers, or we read an entire file into a list of bytes first.

The 'For' loop is basically an interface for consuming all elements of
something one element at a time. It gives us the one element at a time part.
What it doesn't give us is the ability to break out of the loop early for some
reason. For lists, things like 'Has' where we want to stop after the first
item, currently I'm just operating directly on the list. But maybe it makes
sense to have a generic interface.

Maybe I want to be able to write a generic 'Has' function that works over any
data structure supporting iteration and that can break out early. What
interface would I use for that?

